Budgets for Climate, Sustainability and Social Inclusion: 
A Rapid Review of Approaches and Tools
Foreword

Foreword2
As the world reels from the effects of multiple and 
ongoing shocks, actors from across the global 
public financial system are examining their roles 
in unlocking and optimizing financing for the Sus -
tainable Development Goals (SDGs). With COVID-19, 
our challenges in addressing the financing gap for 
achieving the SDGs has widened to an estimated 
$4.2 trillion annually. Global financial assets stand 
at a value of $431 trillion 1  but this finance does 
not necessarily align with the SDGs or flow to the 
geographies that need it most for progress on the 
SDGs. 
In this context, there is an urgent need for public 
development banks to reorient and leverage all 
financial flows in the direction of SDG achievement. 
As recognized by the G20, the world’s 500 plus 
public development banks (PDBs) take critical roles 
to achieve the SDGs and the Paris Agreement goals. 
These actors are critical players from the global 
financial architecture. They manage US$ 23 trillion 
of total assets, out of which more than 83% by PDBs 
from G20 countries. They also represent up to US$ 
2.7 trillion of annual investments, a staggering 12% 
of the total amount invested in the world every year 
by all public and private sources combined.  
The Finance in Common (FICS) movement is the 
global network of PDBs, operating as a global 
initiative where multilateral development banks 
(MDBs) can work with regional associations of 
development finance institutions (DFIs), as well as 
with the International Development Financing Club 
(IDFC) and individual institutions. FICS supports 
the emergence of a global financial framework for 
green and SDG aligned investments. By mobilizing 
all stakeholders, including through more systemic  
dialogue between policy makers, public/private 
finance and regulators, as well as local actors 2, 
FICS acts as a laboratory to revise and enrich the 
business models of PDBs, to ensure that operations 
respond to actual needs, leaving no one behind.
At the country level, PDBs also are supporting 
governments by aligning economic policies and 
financial systems with the SDGs, de-risking invest -
ments, and leveraging private financing especially 
in times of crises. What they do and how they invest 
matter for a better way forward for people and 
planet.
The United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) aims to enable significant shifts in public 
and private finance for sustainable development in 
ways that complement what development banks 
are doing best. Strengthening engagement with 
PDBs is part of UNDP’s core mandate in supporting 
governments to leverage financing, expertise, and 
advocacy from a wider range of sources to achieve 
national priorities.
Through their respective work scaling sustainable 
financing at country level, UNDP and FICS members  
each have a unique understanding of how public 
and private financing actors are innovating and 
scaling reforms. PDBs play a vital part among local 
stakeholders and can deploy a wide range of pow-
erful instruments in order to bridge market failures, 
mobilize domestic resources, redirect investments, 
support private sector mobilization and promote 
sustainability. Despite challenges, some bright 
spots can be seen.
1 2 
1 Global Outlook on Financing for Sustainable Development, OECD 2021
2 Ongoing dialogue with NGFS, GFANZ and UNEP-FI
Foreword
Foreword3
We are honored to present our joint research to the international fora to elevate the collective 
voice of PDBs in the international fora. In doing so, we invite all the development partners to 
engage with our joint research and lessons, while considering how we can accelerate our work 
together toward scaling sustainable financing. 
• PDBs could translate the low-carbon and pro-nature strategies of their states into concrete 
financing, thereby stepping into their role as  “SDGs implementers”, using their government’s 
National Voluntary Contributions to align with national priorities.
• In turning SDG-aligned mandates into action, PDBs require aligned support from partners, 
including other PDBs, MDBs, UN and G20, to set up incentives, de-risking instruments, har -
monized impact measurement standards, and better data equipped with strong capacity. 
Coordination between MDBs and PDBs in parallel with  government ministries are crucial for 
identifying opportunities for co-financing and leveraging PDBs’ knowledge of local markets.
• PDBs call for further political impetus and clarity in their performance frameworks to engage 
different pools of actors, notably the private sector. If PDBs were to commit to a similar ratio 
of an average of 20% as IDFC members have, they could extend more than US$500 billion of 
climate finance per year and mobilize much more private financing.
This is why we’ve joined forces to examine the vital role of public development banks in scaling 
sustainable financing in an affordable way, the good practices PDBs have already developed, 
and how national and international actors including MDBs, UN system and FICS, can enable 
and scale their work.
From this report, the findings show that the importance of aligning finance with the SDGs 
and the Paris Agreement is clear, but it is crucial that we ensure effective collaboration 
between PDBs either in advanced or developing economies, coordination with MDBs, 
and the commitment from the development community:
Marcos Neto, Director, 
Sustainable Finance Hub, UNDP
 
Adama Mariko, 
Secretary General, Finance in Common
 4
Copyright © UNDP . All rights reserved.  
UNDP (2022).
Joint Report: The Role of Public Development Banks in Scaling Sustainable Financing. 
New York: UNDP .  
This report shows the public development banks (PDBs)’ roles, challenges, and experiences in scaling 
sustainable finance based on the interview and survey in a given timeframe. It does not represent the 
views of the whole PDB community. The data are based on the public information or given information 
from the PDBs who participated in either interview or survey. 
The views expressed do not necessarily represent those of our partners including  international financial 
institutions, donor agencies, or the UN Member States. The designations employed and the presentation 
of the information do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the UNDP 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the 
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
For inquiries, please reach out to the Financial Institutions Team at 
bera.pg.fit@undp.org or to the Finance in Common Secretariat at financeincommon@afd.fr.
United Nations Development Programme 
One United Nations Plaza. New York, NY 10017 USA 
Designed by: Onurcan Acar
Acknowledgements5
This report was produced by UNDP in collaboration with Finance in Common Secretariat in 
AFD. The overall partnership initiative was led by the UNDP Sustainable Finance Hub (Financial 
Institutions Team), namely Emily Davis (Partnership Specialist) under the guidance of Marcos 
Mancini (Senior Sustainable Finance Advisor). The research process was led by Jiseon (Sally) 
Park (Partnership Analyst) and conducted by William Price (CEO of D3P Global) with research 
assistance from Dr Thulaisi Sivapalan (D3P Global). The research would not have been pos -
sible without the leadership of Marcos Neto (Director, Sustainable Finance Hub) and Mariana 
Gonzalez (Team Leader, IFI Partnerships).  
 
This initiative is a result of very fruitful collaboration with Finance in Common General Secre-
tariat (SG FICS) within AFD. The effort was led by Arthur Pataud (Advisor), under the leadership 
of Adama Mariko (Secretary General, Finance in Common), together with Ornella d’Amico 
(Deputy to the Secretary General) and Jimena Iraheta (Program Officer). The research greatly 
benefited from the guidance and experiences of AFD colleagues, in particular Emmanuelle 
Matz (Sustainable development analysis and opinion unit), Béryl Bouteille (IDFC secretariat), 
Bastien Bedossa (Financial systems), Régis Marodon (Innovation, research and knowledge), as 
well as experts from the Communications and Strategy, Foresight and Official Relations teams.   
 
This analysis would not have been possible without the essential contributions from the FICS 
regional networks of PDBs, in particular the Association of African Development Finance 
Institutions (AADFI); the Association of Development Financing Institutions in Asia and the 
Pacific (ADFIAP); the Latin American Association of Development Financing Institutions (ALIDE); 
the Association of European Development Finance Institutions (EDFI) and the International 
Development Finance Club (IDFC), as well as the respective UNDP Country Offices. A very 
special thanks go to those who kindly spent time in interviews: Development Bank of Namibia 
(DBN), Development Bank of Rwanda (DBR), Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA),  PT 
Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (PTSMI, Indonesia), Industrial Development Bank of Türkiye (TSKB), 
CDG Capital (Morocco), Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior (BICE, Argentina), Desenvolve 
(São Paulo, Brazil), Nacional Financiera (NAFIN, Mexico), Agence Française de Développement 
(AFD), and Cassa Depositi e Prestiti (CDP).
 
The team has greatly benefited from the constructive feedback from peer experts at Natixis 
and Institut du développement durable et des relations internationales (IDDRI) as well as peer 
reviewers within UNDP , AFD and externally. 
The team also thanks Onurcan Acar for the report design, Lance Garmer for copy editing, and 
Olcay Tetik and Leilei Katof for communications support. 
Acknowledgements
Table of Contents6
Foreword 
Acknowledgements 
Table of Contents
Figures and Boxes 
Glossary 
Executive Summary 
Introduction 
Research Approach 
Summary of PDB cases: experiences and good practices 
Research analysis and key findings 
 
Conclusion
Annex A: Interview Questions 
Annex B: Survey Questions 
Annex C: Graphs from the Survey Analysis 
2
5
6
7
8
9
14
16
18
20
41
43
44
50
Recommendations to improve PDB Mandate, Strategy and Governance aligned to SDGs
Recommendations to improve Lending and guarantees, pricing and currency risk 
Recommendations to improve Data, Measurement, Impact and Taxonomies 
Recommendations to promote Effective Collaboration and International Support 
9
10
12
12
20
28
33
38
5.1 PDBs’ Mandate, Strategy and Governance aligned to the SDGs 
5.2 Lending and guarantees, pricing and currency risk 
5.3 Data, Measurement, Impact and Taxonomies 
5.4 Effective Collaboration and International Support 
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
Table of Contents
Figures and Boxes7
10
50
21
23
51
51
28
29
31
52
34
53
54
37
54
54
55
55
55
26
36
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:
Figure 5:
Figure 6:
Figure 7:
Figure 8:
Figure 9:
Figure 10: 
Figure 11:
Figure 12:
Figure 13:
Figure 14:
Figure 15:
 
Figure 16:
Figure 17:
Figure 18:
Figure 19:
Box 1:
Box 2:
Four main focus areas for PDB challenges and solutions
PDB mandates prioritizing climate actions and the SDGs at all levels
SDG alignment as a core part of the organizational strategy 
AFD’s SDG alignment tool and process
PDB strategy mentioning country’s ‘Voluntary National Review’
PDB strategy mentioning country’s Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDC) and Long-term low green-house gas emissions development strategy (LTS)
Top 3 challenges to promote, develop, and implement changes to support SDGs
PT-SMI’s Blended Finance Structure in the Geothermal Sector
Gender-focused extract from Desenvolve SP loan social eligibility criteria
Measuring and managing the impact of your activities against the SDGs
Does PDB strategy mention country’s ‘Voluntary National Review’ 
Identifying financial split between climate impact mitigation and adaptation
Producing financial analysis on the wider benefits and returns on the project
Do you measure and manage the impact of your activities against the SDGs
Legal/governance/economic barriers to joining international
initiatives on the SDGs
Internally leading and fostering a sustainable development culture 
Developing a holistic strategy and long-term vision linked to SDGs
Mainstreaming SDG priorities within internal operations
Mobilizing and catalyzing truly transformational investment
Integrated National Financing Frameworks (INFFs)
Impact Standards for PDBs
Figures and Boxes
Glossary8
ADB  Asian Development Bank
AFD  Agence Française de Développement, France
BDMG  Banco de Desenvolvimento de Minas Gerais, Brazil
BICE  Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior, Argentina 
CAF  Development Bank of Latin America
CDG  CDG Capital, Morocco 
CDP  Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, Italy
DBN   Development Bank of Namibia 
DBR  Development Bank of Rwanda
DBSA  Development Bank of Southern Africa 
DFI  Development Finance Institution
DSP  Desenvolve SP , São Paulo, Brazil 
ECLAC  Economic Commission for Latin America
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FiCS  Finance in Common Coalition
GTT-LAC Working Group on Sustainable Finance Taxonomies in Latin America and the Caribbean
IADB  Inter-American Development Bank
IDFC  International Development Finance Club
IMM  Impact Monitoring and Measurement
INSE  The Institute of New Structural Economics, China
IS-FSD   OECD-UNDP Impact Standards for Financing Sustainable Development
LAC  Latin America and the Caribbean
MDBs  Multilateral Development Banks
NAFIN  Nacional Financiera, Mexico 
NDB   New Development Bank 
PDB  Public Development Bank
PT-SMI  PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur, Indonesia 
SDGs  Sustainable Development Goals
TSKB  Industrial Development Bank of Türkiye
UNDP  United Nations Development Programme
UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme
USD  US Dollars
Asian Development Bank
Agence Française de Développement, France
Banco de Desenvolvimento de Minas Gerais, Brazil
Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior, Argentina 
Development Bank of Latin America
CDG Capital, Morocco 
Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, Italy
Development Bank of Namibia 
Development Bank of Rwanda
Development Bank of Southern Africa 
Development Finance Institution
Desenvolve SP , São Paulo, Brazil 
Economic Commission for Latin America
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Finance in Common Coalition
Working Group on Sustainable Finance Taxonomies in Latin America and the Caribbean
Inter-American Development Bank
International Development Finance Club
Impact Monitoring and Measurement
The Institute of New Structural Economics, China
OECD-UNDP Impact Standards for Financing Sustainable Development
Latin America and the Caribbean
Multilateral Development Banks
Nacional Financiera, Mexico 
New Development Bank
Public Development Bank
PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur, Indonesia 
Sustainable Development Goals
Industrial Development Bank of Türkiye
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Environment Programme
US Dollars
Glossary
Executive Summary9
This report sets out recommendations for supporting the work of Public Development Banks 
(PDBs)3 as they make progress toward aligning with the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). It is based on in-depth interviews with selected PDBs and relevant experts, in parallel with 
a survey administered to a broader group of PDBs – with an overall focus on national PDBs in 
developing countries. The work was developed by the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) Sustainable Finance Hub in collaboration with the Finance in Common initiative (FiCS)4. 
The research looks at the role of PDBs in scaling financing in an affordable way, the good 
practices PDBs have already developed, what they are seeking to do in the future, and how 
national and international actors can enable and scale their work. The interviews and survey 
were useful complements since they identified some similar but also some varied issues in relation 
to challenges and successes and hence to recommendations. Aspects of these recommendations 
could be relevant for governments (national/sub-national level and G20/non-G20 members), PDBs 
themselves, MDBs, bank coalitions/networks, regulators, credit rating agencies, technical assis -
tance providers and development partners. When collated together, they suggest a focus on four 
main areas.
The four main areas that the report and the recommendations cover are:
(see also Figure 1)
Executive Summary
3 4 
3 PDBs are typically state-owned financial institutions with a mandate to deliver on public policy objectives that normally 
support the economic development of a country or region. This policy mandate distinguishes them from other kinds 
of state-owned financial institutions, such as state-owned commercial banks or insurance companies. PDBs focus on 
financial returns but profit is not the overall goal of their activities. National PDBs can operate sub-nationally, nation-
ally-only, and nationally and regionally, or be regional or global institutions typically called Multilateral Development 
Banks (MDBs) - adapted from Eurodad, 2017.
4 The Finance in Common Coalition (FiCS) is a ‘global gathering of all Public Development Banks (PDBs), which promotes 
coherence in their strategies and operations, by accelerating their convergence towards the SDGs through shared 
standards and best practices’ (FiCS Report to the G20, July 2022).
Executive Summary9
PDB mandate, strategy, and governance aligned to SDGs: 
Support needed to enable PDBs to integrate SDGs throughout their organization’s 
strategy and operations 
Lending and guarantees, pricing and currency risk: 
Challenges and risks PDBs face in scaling sustainable financing at the local level
Data, measurement, impact and taxonomies: 
On the need for harmonized taxonomies in measuring impact
Effective collaboration and international support: 
PDBs’ needs for collaboration with and support from the international 
and development community
1
Executive Summary10
PDB mandate, 
strategy and 
governance 
aligned to 
SDGs
Lending and 
guarantees, 
pricing and 
currency risk
Data, 
measurement, 
impact and 
taxonomies
Effective 
collaboration 
and 
international 
support
Recommendations 
to improve PDBs’ mandates, strategies and governance aligned to SDGs
5 
5 FICS (2022) 
Figure 1: Four main focus areas for PDB challenges and solutions
01
02
Align PDBs’ mandates and activities with the Paris Agreement and SDGs by 
providing them with right incentives, shifting away from investments that are 
not compatible with a just and inclusive transition towards sustainable, low-carbon 
and resilient development trajectories. For example, climate finance now accounts 
for 20% of total commitments made by IDFC members on average. If PDBs were to 
commit to a similar ratio, they could extend more than USD $500 billion of climate 
finance per year and mobilize much more through the private sector5.
Pursue an integrated approach to net impact, combining negative screening 
with positive assessment of impact rather than having many separate processes 
towards achieving SDGs both at a strategic and project level. The interdependence 
between the SDGs is still a particularly difficult issue for PDBs. Greater awareness 
plus new tools to manage potential trade-offs between equality, gender, poverty, 
unemployment, climate and environment are important. The huge challenges coun-
tries face, exacerbated by COVID, make it even more important to address potential 
trade-offs and ensure that a focus on vital issues like gender-based violence is not 
lost in big picture debates on the SDGs.
In general, the results of the interviews and survey demonstrated a common understanding 
and agreement regarding the importance of aligning with the SDGs and the Paris Agreement 
at a strategic and ambitious level, while signaling a range of important challenges, as well as 
good practices and opportunities including for future support from partners in the development 
community. 
AREA 01 AREA 02 AREA 03 AREA 04
Executive Summary11
04
03
05
06
07
Enable PDBs by providing them lower-cost finance, given that they are trying to 
support development objectives, but often through recipients that are heavily focused 
on short-term survival. At the moment, there is often no difference between the costs 
of ‘normal’ funding and sustainable loans, meaning there is not much incentive for 
recipients to take the sustainable loans if reporting or other requirements are more 
demanding. Since PDBs do not have individual customer deposits as a source of 
low-cost financing, they can be at a disadvantage compared to commercial banks. 
Furthermore, engagement with Credit Rating Agencies may be important so that they 
do not reduce a PDB rating as it aligns to SDGs, which would increase PDBs’ cost of 
capital.
Support for longer-term finance in addition to lowering the cost, because the 
long-term investments and longer-term payoffs that can be associated with SDG 
alignment need to be matched by longer-term funding to help the business case. 
Too often the funding is too short-term.
Support PDBs in dealing with currency risk when receiving support in US dollars 
or other international currencies but lend-on in local currency (LCU).  Most PDBs, 
and especially smaller national or sub-national PDBs in developing countries, cannot 
afford to hedge the currency risk when they receive support in US dollars from devel 
opment partners but have to lend to national recipients in local currency. It is vital
Enhance alignment of strategies between the national/sub-national govern -
ment and PDBs. This can include increased dialogue between PDBs and national 
authorities through engagement with Integrated National Financing Frameworks, 
financing strategies and dialogue platforms, to enable  and strengthen PDBs’ specific 
inputs into national financing and strategy development. In addition, this can help 
Ministries of Finance, Environment and Development to shape well-aligned national 
strategies that take each perspective into account. 
Ensure sufficient training and support for PDB Board members, particularly 
non-executives, who may change frequently due to political changes, but also for 
staff more generally, so that they can understand the drivers for change and support 
strategic reforms. PDBs asked for  comprehensive training, capacity development 
measures, and clear support from the leadership is required alongside other key 
changes highlighted in the recommendations.
Recommendations 
to improve lending, guarantees, pricing and currency risk
Executive Summary12
12
11
10
09
08
Focus on issues that will attract the private sector to the field,  boost collabo -
ration and potentially help evolve PDB business models where needed for the 
future. One element is harmonized taxonomies (as above). In addition, bringing 
the private sector - including commercial banks, investment funds, the pension and 
insurance sector - and PDBs together more generally can help expand PDB impact, in 
addition to closer links to the government and public sector actions outlined above.
Develop clear definitions and taxonomies on common impact measurement 
standards that link directly to the desired outcomes. These are pre-conditions to sup-
port SDG-aligned projects and prevent green washing and social investment washing. 
A strong push on a limited set of standards that can be implemented without great 
cost would make implementation of lending policy much simpler.
Promote harmonized taxonomies in particular to make more progress on 
structuring asset classes because climate and social investment finance can scale 
if financial actors can create transparent asset classes into which people can invest. 
The asset classes should be well-designed so that they do not negatively impact other 
SDG targets and transparently deliver positive impact.
Support improved data and reporting for PDBs and clients, through technical 
assistance and direct support to priority sectors to improve data and reporting, par-
ticularly on gender. This is also important because collecting additional data to track 
alignment with SDGs can raise costs.
Recommendations 
to improve data, measurement, impact and taxonomies 
Recommendations 
to promote effective collaboration and international support
Enable access to affordable experts to provide technical assistance to enhance 
PDB capacity and that of project partners, whether from domestic or international 
sources.
for the G20 and others to cover or reduce the costs of this currency risk given PDBs 
with projects in one country cannot diversify it.

Executive Summary13
13
14
15
Enhance commitment from the development community, including the G20, to 
support the mobilization of PDB and private finance even more given limited gov -
ernment budgets badly affected by the pandemic. To achieve the SDGs by 2030, and 
address pandemic recovery and a just transition, will be too difficult from fiscal space 
alone. So, G20 and other international groups, including the MDBs, could continue 
to boost the profile and need for engagement with PDBs and coordinate amongst 
themselves to reduce overlap and ensure maximum impact. 
Ensure it is simpler to deploy funds provided by international partners and 
that consistent financing operates alongside the flexibility to fund new and 
innovative approaches.  For some funds, the accountability mechanisms are so 
cumbersome that it stops facilities from being used. In addition, some PDBs find 
that funding does not last long enough to achieve results, whilst others wanted more 
rapid transfers of resources to emerging priorities and innovative approaches.
Apply more emphasis on subnational capacity and the ability to focus on local 
level.  Building on strong knowledge of local market stakeholders, PDBs and Subna-
tional Development Banks can play a critical role to bridge the subnational financial 
gap. This local knowledge can relate to key gaps for intervention in different parts of 
a country and help external investors not duplicate existing initiatives or repeat past 
mistakes. It can also be to create the delivery partnerships that will ensure a project 
is successful, including engaging local stakeholders, and especially women and those 
who may not traditionally have a voice in the development process. Finally, there can 
be benefit for data project monitoring and evaluation.
Introduction14
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has worked with the Finance in 
Common initiative (FiCS) to highlight the experiences of public development banks (PDBs) 
in scaling sustainable financing. This report explores the key challenges for PDBs as they 
move toward alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); the role of PDBs in 
scaling financing in an affordable way, particularly in emerging economies, to deliver inclusive, 
equitable and sustainable growth; good practices PDBs have already developed; and what 
national and international actors can do to further enable and scale their work.
Well-run PDBs can serve as game-changers, not only thanks to their financing power, but 
also because they have a variety of levers for action. They can finance and foster low-emis-
sion and climate resilient investments by providing lower-cost and longer-term financing. 
They can be catalysts of external public and private finance and act as early investors to prove 
commercial viability. PDBs also engage in public policy dialogue to support the development of 
an enabling policy environment to attract private investment. This was one of the reasons the 
report of the Secretary General on the International Financial System and Development in 2022 
specifically highlighted the role of the PDBs and made recommendations for how to enhance 
their role (UN 2022).
PDBs manage USD 23 trillion of total assets. They provide up to USD 2.7 trillion of annual 
investments, out of which more than 83% is from PDBs from G20 countries. This represents 
approximately 12% of total global investment and has grown 15% between 2019 and 2020 
(FiCS 2022). As of 2022, there are more than 550 PDBs in the world, of which 90% are national 
development banks only and 10% have international activities. Hence, they are an important 
part of the national and global financial landscape and a crucial partner in sustainable finance.
Introduction
2
Introduction15
a6 
6 The Secretariat for FiCS has its headquarters within the AFD in Paris.
FiCS is a unique global network, which brings together in a concrete and collaborative 
way key stakeholders from a wide range of countries across all regions 6. The work of 
FiCS reinforces the coherence in PDBs strategies and operations in developing and emerging 
countries by accelerating convergence to shared standards and best practices. It disseminates 
knowledge and expertise on shared priorities and facilitates the identification of co-financing 
opportunities in countries or regions of common interest. Finally, FiCS supports the emergence 
of a global financial framework for green and SDG aligned investment.
In 2021, the G20 acknowledged FiCS by recognizing “the important role of PDBs towards 
the achievement of the SDGs and the Paris Agreement” and asking it to report its progress 
in 2022”. As entrusted by the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group (SFWG), UNDP helped 
define the G20 Sustainable Finance Roadmap, which frame current and future efforts by 29 
major economies to accelerate financial, fiscal and economy policy choices in line with the SDGs. 
The roadmap outlining five key focus areas with multiple individual actions for each helped 
provide an overall framework in which to place the results set out in this paper. 
Research Approach16
This paper is the result of a series of in-depth interviews with 11 national PDBs 7 , along-
side a survey completed by 28 PDBs (plus 7 MDBs as a reference) as members of the FiCS 
Coalition. It aims to supplement the growing body of knowledge on the importance of PDBs 
in financing the SDGs yet focus on national and sub-national PDBs in developing countries 
who often do not get central attention in policy discussions, and represent their challenges, 
progress, and experiences in scaling sustainable financing at the country, local level. With such 
an aim, potential PDB interviewees across different sizes, ages, and histories were selected to 
give a broad spread globally, and interviews were conducted among those who accepted the 
invitation within the research window. In parallel, interviews with non-PDBs were conducted to 
supplement the research8. 
The interviews were based on 8 questions with a general introduction to the nature and 
history of the organization followed by the core question set. It focused on reforms and 
challenges to meet the SDGs already overcome or in progress, remaining barriers with a specific 
request for case studies on how the PDBs had improved their contributions to the SDGs, and 
how the G20 and SFWG could support further advances.
The survey was designed to broaden and supplement the discussions both from the interviews 
and literature. It was shared with the members of the FiCS via its Secretariat and the regional 
PDB networks9  during the month of August 2022 for anonymous and voluntary participation. 
7 8 9 
7 Development Bank of Namibia (DBN), Development Bank of Rwanda (DBR), Development Bank of Southern Africa 
(DBSA), Indonesia – PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (PTSMI), Industrial Development Bank of Türkiye (TSKB), Morocco 
– CDG Capital, Argentina - Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior (BICE), Brazil São Paulo – Desenvolve, Mexico – 
Nacional Financiera (NAFIN), France – Agence Française de Développement (AFD), Italy – Cassa Depositi e Prestiti 
(CDP)
8 Interviews with non-PDBs included Innovation, Research and Knowledge department of AFD, Natixis Corporate and 
Investment Banking and IDDRI Research.
9 Nine regional and international PDB networks are part of the FiCS Executive Committee: i) Association of African 
Development Finance Institutions (AADFI); ii) Association of Development Financing Institutions in Asia and the 
Pacific (ADFIAP); iii) Association of National Development Finance Institutions in Member Countries of the Islamic 
Development Banks (ADFIMI); iv) Latin American Association of Development Financing Institutions (ALIDE); v) 
European Association of Public Banks (EAPB); vi) Association of European Development Finance Institutions (EDFI); 
vii) European Long-Term Investors Association (ELTI); viii) D20-Long-Term Investors Club (D20-LTIC); ix) International 
Development Finance Club (IDFC)
Research Approach
3
Research Approach17
Given the research focus on the national and subnational PDBs, their responses are mainly 
shown in the analysis section. MDBs’ responses were taken as a reference, but when there were 
differences from national PDBs, these are set out in the text. Annex A and B have full set of the 
interview and survey questions respectively. 
The paper is not intended to summarize the state of the broader literature or to compare the 
PDB views with that literature, but the research drew on this knowledge base to help design the 
interviews and the survey10.  The paper also notes that PDBs at different stages on the reform 
journey, so despite responding on the same issue, one would be more comprehensive than 
another. However, the paper aims to highlight the issues raised rather than provide an exact 
benchmarking. Also, given the voluntary nature of the survey, there is some selection bias in the 
respondents, for example, there is a relatively high weighting of PDBs from Latin America com-
pared to Middle East and North Africa (MENA). But given most interviewed PDBs representing 
fair global representation also filled out the survey including CDG Capital in Morocco and TSKB 
in Türkiye, there was partial coverage of the wider region. 
10 
10 The FiCS website hosts a wide range of publications from FiCS members and associated researchers at https://
financeincommon.org/publications. FiCS also hosts an annual Summit with a linked Research Conference which 
showcases new work on PDBs. The major multilateral development banks (MDBs) also publish research on the role 
and experience of PDBs and MDBs. Finally, there are a wide range of research institutes, practitioners and univer-
sities conducting relevant research. See for example the special edition of the Review of Political Economy, Vol 34, 
2022 Issue 2 for latest research and references, Griffith-Jones and Ocampo (2018), Euroadad (2017) or IDDRI (2020).
Summary of PDB cases:  experiences and good practices18
Summary of PDB cases: 
experiences and good practices
Summary of PDB cases:  experiences and good practices18
PDBs were asked to provide an example that could illustrate what their organization had 
done to help move towards achieving the SDGs. For many, it was difficult to identify only 
one, and there are many more interesting examples on their linked websites. More details are 
provided throughout the document, but in summary: 
A project preparation platform to originate projects to improve the quantity and quality of 
projects and to increase the likelihood they will have a positive impact through a more proactive 
approach.
The way it maps SDG impact within sub-themes so that as TSKB sets the targets for SDG impact 
almost 90% of the lending book cover one or two of the SDGs. TSKB also quantifies lending 
targets for SDGs as part of the process.
Shift from no green-financing strategy in the country to aligning the Bank as a climate and 
green finance institution that links to national priorities. They now have policies and procedures 
to align with safeguards on the environment from international best practice and are seeking 
accreditation from the Green Financing Initiative.
South Africa Climate Finance Facility (CFF) is a lending facility intended to increase climate 
related investment in Southern Africa by addressing market constraints with a catalytic role 
with a blended finance approach. The CFF will use its capital to fill market gaps and crowd-in 
private sector. It will also have gender-related benefits since women are disproportionately 
vulnerable to climate change impacts.
They used a new credit enhancement to support a renewable energy client who wanted to issue 
bonds. PT-SMI arranged a standby facility to support payments if the project could not find 
sufficient cashflow which allowed the credit rating to rise from A- to AAA.
Development Bank of Namibia (DBN)
Industrial Development Bank of Türkiye (TSKB)
Development Bank of Rwanda (DBR)
Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA)
PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (PTSMI) Indonesia
4
Summary of PDB cases:  experiences and good practices19
Development and financing of a desalination plant that provided drinking water for local pop-
ulation to provide a clear social payoff, but also protected the supply of water for farmers to 
support food production and economic livelihoods.
Their new ‘Green Line’ financing and support facility which now forms a significant percentage 
of new investment and supports companies to invest in projects that will improve costs and 
energy efficiency.
Alignment of gender equality and lending to SMEs, with a financial line to support women-con-
trolled SMEs. To be able to take the loan the female CEO had to enter the number of women 
and reach the threshold for the percentage of shareholders who were women. This was part of 
its broader focus on aligning lending with the SDGs.
A project in Egypt with a holistic/systemic approach to the financial system where they sup -
port supervisory authorities such as the banking and financial markets supervisors to embed 
sustainable principles within the regulations – e.g., disclosure, stress testing, asset class devel-
opment. By supporting public financial actors they can have a catalytic impact on the overall 
financial system .
The new NAFIN Sustainability Fund, supported in its creation as an innovative legal and financial 
instrument by the UNDP’s BIOFIN initiative, working alongside the Ministry of Environment on 
a project supported by the World Bank Group, to enhance the way in which they can support 
investment in companies to boost environmental outcomes.
CDP , in its role as Italy’s Development Finance Institution, signed a €100 million loan in August 
2022 with the Africa Finance Corporation (AFC). AFC is one of the major multilateral development 
banks operating in the African continent, whose shareholders include over 30 states, as well 
as leading African financial institutions. This first collaboration between CDP and AFC targets 
investments in the fields of renewable energy, energy efficiency and sustainable infrastructure 
in Africa, contributing concretely to SDGs 7, 9, 13 and 17. 
CDG Capital Morocco
Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior (BICE) Argentina
Desenvolve SP (São Paulo) Brazil
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) France
Nacional Financiera (NAFIN)
Cassa Depositi e Prestiti (CDP) Italy
11 
11 This focus on the potentially broader impact regulation was mirrored in UNDP’s advisory support to China’s Nation-
al Association of Financial Market Institutional Investors, the self-regulatory organization of China OTC financial 
market. The work focused on guidance for Social Responsibility Bond and Sustainable Development Bonds. The 
guidance incorporates key components of the UNDP SDG Impact Standards, and the SDG Finance Taxonomy - for 
example, principles including Do No Significant Harm (DNSH), serving vulnerable groups, as well as considerations 
of using SDG targets as impact indicators.
Research analysis and key findings 20
Research analysis and key findings 
Research analysis and key findings 20
This section provides a synthesis analyzing both responses from the interviews and survey 
aligned to the four main pillars of the recommendations, as listed in the Executive Summary. 
This is complemented by interviews with experts and previous literature. It also explains PDBs’ 
case studies in more detail and introduces several partnership and support opportunities that 
could support such initiatives.
5.1 PDBs mandates, strategies and governance aligned to the SDGs
There was broadly a positive link between SDGs and the current work and mandate of the 
PDBs. For example, in relation to the survey question on whether the organizations mandate 
prioritized climate actions and the SDGs at all levels, 25 out of 28 or 89% said that it did (Annex 
C, Figure 2), however, there were more challenges when the questions dug below the surface. 
First, most noted that some form of regulatory change to ensure greater alignment with 
not only climate and environment but also the social aspects of the SDGs would be useful. 
For some, such as CDG Capital in Morocco, the SDGs were in effect always a core part of their 
business model.  Indeed, its mission is to be a corporate and investment bank at the service 
of the sustainable development of the national economy and its financial market.  For others, 
significant reform and renewal was and is a core part of their aim to boost their impact on 
the SDGs, despite successes already. One example is BICE from Argentina which is starting a 
transition in name and through regulatory change to be the Development Bank of Argentina, 
to move beyond its original history as an investment and external credit bank. For CDP in Italy, 
being founded as Italy’s National Promotional Institution meant it already had a public mandate 
to promote sustainable growth although on the domestic market. It only formally became a 
Development Finance Institution (DFI) with a development role outside of Italy in 201512.
5
12 
12 CDP Becomes New Italian Development Finance Institution (DFI)
Research analysis and key findings 21
In the literature and other surveys, a key concern raised is that an organization can appear 
to have strategic alignment with the SDGs, but this can be very much a retrospective 
exercise to map its activities to the SDGs, rather than a fully alignment created as a core 
part of the strategy process. In some cases, this could be ‘green-washing’ or ‘SDG-washing’. In 
other cases, it could be that there was a sincere attempt to start taking into account the SDGs 
but that, thus far, this had not permeated through the whole organization and reached the level 
of decision making on project approvals. For this reason, the survey asked a direct question on 
this issue. This is set out in Figure 3. This shows much more nuance about SDG alignment into 
strategy. 50% of PDBs said that the SDGs were fully incorporated into organizational strategy, 
and 36% said the SDGs were partially incorporated. 14% said there was limited or no mapping. 
This fits more closely the results from the interviews and other reports where some organiza-
tions had made significant progress, whereas others had started with a set of issues – often on 
the environmental side – but had not moved to full and broad alignment yet.
Figure 3: SDG alignment as a core part of the organizational strategy
PDBs were also asked to self-benchmark their progress over the past 5 years in four areas 
using the framework developed in the European Think Tanks Group report (2021): (i) lead inter-
nally and foster a sustainable development culture; (ii) develop a holistic strategy and long-term 
vision; (iii) mainstream SDG priorities within internal operations; and (iv) mobilize and catalyze 
transformational investment13. 
13 4
13  ETTG-study-Financing-the-2030-Agenda-An-SDG-alignment-framework-for-Public-Development-Banks.pdf
Research analysis and key findings 22
14 15 
14 Note that a few responses are being checked for the ‘Internally Leading and Fostering Culture’ question as they 
appear to rate performance now lower than before. Some PDBs have confirmed it was an error and updated the 
responses which are included but checking is still in progress.
15 A growing number of financial centres have responded to the survey year after year, from 12 in its first edition 
(2018), to 20 in 2019, 24 in 2020 and 29 in 2021. This is a response rate of 75% of a growing network membership 
in 2021 (39 members as of end 2021, vs. 36 members when the survey was launched that year).
There were modest improvements in average performance, and reduction in the number 
of PDBs reporting very low scores against the four different elements (Annex C, Figure 
16-19). This fits with a narrative that fewer organizations are still waiting to start the journey on 
SDG alignment, which helps to pull up the tail of the lower performers. That said, it is important 
to remember that the survey was voluntary and hence has selection-bias. But equally it is inter-
esting that the self-assessment was so low in many cases 5 years ago (and still in some cases)14.
There was most significant progress on ‘developing a holistic strategy and long-term 
vision linked to the SDGs’ whereas least progress was in the ‘lead internally and foster a 
sustainable development culture’, and the other two areas were in the middle. Focus on 
culture was less pronounced in the interviews and survey, hence not included in one of the main 
pillars of the recommendations, but it shows that there is a challenge of translating a strategic 
vision into the ‘hearts and minds’ of an organization. 
In terms of SDG alignment, for the first time in 2021, the UNDP Financial Centres for Sustain-
ability (FC4S) Network measured the level of involvement of each one of the SDGs, both at the 
financial centre and the country level planning and development processes, within its Assess-
ment Programme15. Findings showed that SDG 13 (climate action) leads with 83 percent of 
responding financial centres considering it,  followed by SDG 9 (industry, innovation and 
infrastructure) and SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth) with 76 percent each. Neverthe-
less, although almost half of the financial centres surveyed reported using all 17 SDGs while 
setting their strategies and plans, they infrequently measure and disclose progress against 
them, suggesting an initial level of consideration. 
 
Despite significant progress, the Covid pandemic has emphasized for some PDBs even 
more the need to work on the trade-offs between the SDGs and have a robust way of 
taking investment and strategy decisions both in the short-term but also in the long-term 
for more a more durable transformation. 
CDG Capital, Morocco The work of CDG Capital provides an interesting example on 
trade-offs between SDGs. They structured and financed a large new desalination 
plant within a PPP scheme, serving both needs of local population, by providing 
them with access to clean drinking water, as well as farmers, by helping them 
maintain and develop their business. Thus, the project played a strong social and 
economic development role, although, at this stage, the plant is powered by the 
grid which has a mixture of fossil fuels and renewable sources.
CASE: CDG Capital, Morocco
CASE 01
Research analysis and key findings 23
This is perhaps one of the toughest areas faced by PDBs, and one where the need for new 
tools and approaches is most needed. In this context, the work by AFD on its ‘Sustainable 
Development Analysis and Opinion Mechanism’ is particularly useful (AFD 2022).  DBSA noted 
how important it was to ensure that there was an appropriate balance in the focus on social 
and poverty issues and environmental issues – as well as emphasizing that in many cases 
the trade-off may not exist in reality but be an issue of perception by the public, the media 
or politicians. But even in these cases, it was important to focus on proactive education and 
communication – from Board members to staff and to potential recipients.
The work of the AFD and the IDFC to develop toolkits to help alignment and mea-
surement are an important part of embedding strategic change in PDBs. Figure 
2 shows the process to support the use of the AFD’s ‘Sustainable Development 
Analysis and Opinion Mechanism’ so that SDG alignment can be embedded in 
the project cycle.
CASE: AFD, France
CASE 02
Figure 4: AFD’s SDG Alignment Tool and Process
Source: AFD
Research analysis and key findings 24
Furthermore, some, but not all PDBs, were developing closer alignment with the national 
development priorities of their countries. This was part of the reforms underway in Rwanda 
and an on-going process for the Development Bank of South Africa. NAFIN in Mexico explicitly 
link their activities to Mexico’s ‘Nationally Determined Contribution’ under the Paris Agreement 
(NAFIN, 2021). This highlights that when a national government – including a G20 government 
– makes commitments towards the SDGs and implements this as part of its national plan there 
can be a dual pay-off from the knock-on effect on the activities of a PDB – particularly if govern-
ments make it simple for PDBs to understand the specific actions they can take.
The survey also suggests a mixed picture with 50% of PDBs showing close links to both the 
global SDGs and the national strategies from their respective governments including the ‘Vol-
untary National Reviews’ in which countries review their own progress against the SDGs16. 50% 
of PDBs suggested no link to these national articulations (Annex C, Figure 5). This could be 
because the PDB started work on alignment ahead of the respective national government, or 
that the national documents do not necessarily have the detail or clarity needed to help a PDB 
‘cascade’ down its own objectives from the global to the national and then to itself as a specific 
institution. However, it does highlight the issue of the ‘line of sight’ from global to local that 
many of the PDBs highlighted as important – and an important rationale for why they should 
be supported by multilateral and external actors.
Improving strategic alignment for the PDBs with national priorities and the SDGs was a 
recurring theme of strategy development and planning undertaken in the past 5 or more 
years. For example, the Development Bank of Rwanda case study could be on their funda -
mental reforms in strategy (as well as personnel) in the past 3 years. Previously their activity 
was not really aligned to the Government’s plans or to the international stakeholders in terms 
of the SDGs. Interestingly, the recent extensive reforms did not need any change in mandate – 
just the creation of a new, clearer and more aligned strategy which took the SDGs and national 
priorities and showed how they could be supported by specific activities by the bank. To match 
international areas of interest clearly it was important that the national government strategy 
was also linked to the SDGs. On the other hand, CDP Italy brought SDGs into its by-laws in 2021, 
embedding sustainability into daily responsibilities across the bank. CDG Capital in Morocco 
identified 12 of the 17 SDGs that are critical to their activities and the Executive Committee 
Board is now tasked with following up progress on the action plan. In South Africa’s DBSA, the 
new strategic model is known as the ‘Integrated Sustainable Development Approach’. It provides 
the overall framework and will consolidate the effort into a coordinated net zero pathway – with 
multiple initiatives driving the transition agenda – now and in the future.
16 
16 “Voluntary National Review (VNR) is a process through which countries assess and present national progress made 
in implementing the 2030 Agenda, including achieving its 17 Sustainable Development Goals and the pledge to 
leave no one behind. The purpose of VNRs is to present a snapshot of where the country stands in the implemen-
tation of the Sustainable Development Goals, with a view to help accelerate progress through experience sharing, 
peer-learning, identifying gaps and good practices, and mobilizing partnerships”.
 https://www.ohchr.org/en/sdgs/voluntary-national-reviews 
Research analysis and key findings 25
 
The relevance of other reviews and national policy documents was specifically asked 
also in relation to the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 17 and the ‘Long-term 
low green-house gas emissions development strategies’ (LTS) 18. These documents to be 
produced by national governments are both part of the Paris Climate Agreement (voluntary) 
commitments to set out how a country will meet the overall commitments and/or specific strat-
egies in relation to emissions. From the survey results, these have so far not proved to be an 
important input for PDBs in updating and aligning their strategies to the SDGs (Annex C, Figure 
6). A significant majority – 61% - said that neither document was mentioned in the PDB strategy. 
To some extent this is to be expected, since many of the PDBs highlighted that it was already a 
very challenging task to try and deal with the 17 SDGs and the 169 targets contained within the 
Sustainable Development Goals. On the other hand, for a PDB seeking to show its relevance 
to its national government and secure resources, showing how it is aligned to such national 
strategies and can help the government achieve its international aims could be very useful.
17 18 
17 The Paris Agreement requests countries to submit a Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to set out their 
commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and strengthen resilience to climate change. They are voluntary 
but expected to articulate how a country will achieve its commitments. https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/
the-paris-agreement/nationally-determined-contributions-ndcs/nationally-determined-contributions-ndcs 
18  Quality Assurance Checklist: For Long-Term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development Strategies | United Na-
tions Development Programme (undp.org)
Research analysis and key findings 26
In the 2015 Addis Ababa Action Agenda, UN member states called for the development of 
Integrated National Financing Frameworks to support nationally owned sustainable 
development strategies. These INFFs are designed to address the gap between national 
aspirations for sustainable development and the policies, instruments and standards that 
are needed to realize the necessary public and private investments. 
 
Eighty-six countries are now using the INFF approach to shape a more sustainable 
financing architecture at the country level. By providing a systematic analysis to better 
mobilize and align capital with the SDGs for both public and private sector, INFFs help 
countries identify and prioritize the changes to policies, regulations, instruments, and 
institutions within a financing strategy that can drive transformative SDG investment. 
Among these eighty-six countries, forty are expected to develop such a financing strategy 
in the coming year, and more than 250 financing reforms have already been prioritized for 
immediate action. These reforms are designed to unlock new capital and promote greater 
effectiveness and SDG impact in key areas of financing, through nationally-led, tailored 
financing solutions. Mongolia, for example, was the first country to officially endorse its 
INFF financing strategy, which aims to help the country meet the $15.7 billion cost of its 
medium-term development plan. Designed to increase financing sources, promote align-
ment and increase impact, the financing strategy sets out a range of reforms to public 
and private finance. Among these are both strategic and operational changes that the 
Development Bank of Mongolia has implemented to enhance the way that it manages 
its portfolio in relation to national sustainable development objectives. 
IFIs including PDBs have a key role to play in strengthening SDG financing at the 
country level, and INFFs offer an important platform for deepening collaboration.  
As financing strategies are designed, IFIs including PDBs can feed in their perspectives 
and evidence on the major challenges, opportunities and solutions for mobilizing and 
aligning capital with the SDGs. They can provide technical inputs in costing, expenditure 
and accountability assessments, financial sector development assessments, and a range of 
other technical tools. They can also shape and champion the potential impact of reforms 
prioritized through INFF processes, demonstrating their benefits and supporting implemen-
tation across the wider financial system at the country level. This engagement is growing. 
IFIs, for example, are increasingly actively supporting INFF processes in a variety of ways 
in more than 50 countries. This includes engagement by the World Bank in more than 40 
INFF processes, by the IMF in more than 25 and other MDBs such as the Asian Development 
Bank, Islamic Development Bank and African Development Bank in more than 30 INFFs.
Integrated National Financing Frameworks (INFFs) as a
platform for PDBs to align their mandates, strategies, 
andgovernance with national development priorities
BOX 1
Research analysis and key findings 27
Additionally, governance, or corporate governance is a key area of focus in all financial 
institutions, from the international standards on banking, insurance or pensions through 
to the standards for Social Security Institutions. Good governance is no less important for 
the PDBs. A recent report (Attridge and others, 2021) highlights that higher levels of political 
influence through political appointments are associated with weaker financial performance. 
On the one hand, political influence can help align Government development goals with a 
bank’s financial lending – and this alignment is important. But there can be risks in relation 
to the long-term goals on sustainability if political appointees don’t have this long-term view, 
meaning that sustainability priorities could change between political cycles and hence prevent 
real integration of sustainability in PDB operations. Weaker financial performance for these 
reasons could therefore be associated with a sub-optimal impact performance. 
Some PDBs highlighted progress on governance – with improvements in the range or depth 
of expertise particularly in the executive management teams - or development of new Board 
structures and committees to embed new top-down direction to an SDG related change pro -
gram. CDP in Italy extended the Board Risk Committee scope to include sustainability as part 
of its reform process. TSKB, Türkiye has a Sustainability Committee under its board of directors. 
Half of the board of directors are also members of the Sustainability Committee, including 
TSKB’s CEO, to ensure the changes are driven by the leadership. 
However, there is a continued need and challenge to boost human capital – sometime in 
the Boards, sometimes in PDB staff and sometimes in potential credit recipients.  This was 
why many PDBs highlighted the importance of internal or external technical advisory support 
that they offered as part of their overall package. In some cases, this need for the right people 
with the right skills was exacerbated by rapid turnover of senior staff – which also had broader 
implications in terms of the ability to set and implement strategy.
 
Improving human capital to support strategic change came from hiring new people, but 
more often extensive training for existing staff. CDG Capital, Morocco, for example, has 
called on external expertise when needed but has also put in a lot of effort on training and 
uplifting skills. Most PDBs highlighted that to embed a new SDG linked process in the organiza-
tion required a ‘hearts and minds’ approach as well as technical training for the staff working in 
the project preparation and credit allocation process – as well as changes to Board governance 
and project approval processes. But a number had already conducted SDG training for staff, 
both general and focused on specific roles.
Overall, key common feature was that all the PDBs are currently evolving and taking 
active steps to improve alignment with the SDGs. In other words, there was none that 
felt it was in a  steady state where they had achieved all they wanted in relation to the 
SDGs. For some, like the Development Bank of Rwanda, this was part of a wholesale reform 
and fundamental reshaping of the whole organization in the past few years, after over 50 years 
Research analysis and key findings 27
Research analysis and key findings 28
of operation. This involved a new Board, a new strategy and a change program to support the 
delivery of the new approach. For others, the changes were more evolutionary, forming part 
of successive strategy cycles and building in importance over time such as TSKB in Türkiye, or 
AFD in France. But for all the 11 interviewees, it was clear that the imperative of the SDGs was 
driving changes, even though at different speeds.
5.2. Lending, guarantees, pricing and currency risk
One common theme was progress on reaching back up the project value chain so that the 
PDBs were more proactive in developing a larger and higher quality pipeline of investible 
projects throughout their portfolio against the top challenge on the developing a compre-
hensive portfolio with an SDG rather than a pipeline of good individual projects (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Top 3 challenges to promote, develop, and implement changes to support SDGs
This was raised by many of the PDBs, including the Development Bank of Namibia, and PT-SMI 
in Indonesia who have increased their focus on feasibility studies and issues such as clear 
power purchase agreements to support renewable energy as a specific and technical area on 
which progress was needed to make projects simpler to finance and hence to improve that 
particular project pipeline. Credit enhancement in a renewable energy project in the Tamaris 
Hydro (electric) power project allowed the rating of the project bonds to increase from A- to 
AAA, a full 6 steps to the highest bond rating.
Research analysis and key findings 29
Figure 8: PT-SMI’s Blended Finance Structure in the Geothermal Sector
PT-SMI, Indonesia The technical assistance aspects of project development 
support to improve project flow can also be enhanced by finance for project 
development costs, including the potentially risky exploration phase of project 
development. In relation to developing geothermal power, PT-SMI designed an 
instrument that can supply a 100% loan for exploration with 50% forgiveness if 
the company cannot find the right entry point for viable access to geo-thermal 
activity. This was a vital innovation because there is huge scope for the use of 
geothermal power in Indonesia, with obvious payoffs for the environment, as 
well as to reduce dependence on externally sourced power and the potential to 
create jobs locally. However, the process of finding a viable access point to the 
geothermal power that can be used at scale is complex and subject to significant 
risk. Hence the new facility helps to increase finance by enhancing the credit 
rating of bonds for the activity and will flow directly into meeting the SDGs. Figure 
3 shows a schematic of the project, including the multinational cooperation 
alongside PT-SMI. 
CASE: PT-SMI, Indonesia
CASE 03
PT Sarana Mul� Infrastruktur (Persero)  |  15
Blended Finance Structure to de-risk Exploration Stages of Geothermal Development
Geothermal Upstream 
Development Projects 
(Government Drilling)
1
Waesano
Projects 
Manggarai Barat,
NTT
Geothermal Resource 
Risk Mitigation (GREM) 
(SOE Drilling)
2
Loan Facility 
with De-risking 
for SOE drilling
Geothermal Resource 
Risk Mitigation (GREM) 
(Private Drilling)
3
100% PISP fund or 
GREM
Loan Facility with 
De-risking from 
donor fund
Loca�on Wae Sano
Province Nusa Tenggara Timur
Poten�al Capacity 30 MW  
Exploration Drilling cost USD 30.3 million
Program Geothermal Energy Upstream 
Development Projects (GEUDP)
Showcase Blended Finance on Clean Energy Sector (De-risking):
Blended Finance Structure in Geothermal Sector
GREM
Geothermal Resource 
Risk Mitigation
Public 
Window
SOEs
50% 
De-risking 
Government 
Fund
50% 
Blended Loan
IBRD/GCF/CTF
Private 
Window
Private 
Sectors
50% 
Blended Loan
IBRD/GCF/CTF
50% 
Financial Instrument 
Reimbursable Grant 
GCF/CTF
CTF grant 
USD 49 mill.
GEF grant 
USD 6.25 mill. 
Co-financing
USD 49 mill.
TA grant 
NZD 2.13 
millions
Public Sector
Development 
Financial 
Institution
Green fund 
(Donor)
Collaboration of Public Sector, DFIs and Donors to de-risk projects
Source: PT-SMI
Research analysis and key findings 30
For a number of the PDBs, the development and placement of green and sustainable 
bonds were identified as key milestones on their reform journey. For example, BDMG in 
Brazil conducted the first private placement of a sustainable bond in the US by a Brazilian 
development bank. TSKB in Türkiye highlighted that they were one of the first issuers of a green 
bond in collaboration with the World Bank among many others and the allocation of proceeds 
as well as the impact of bond utilization are reported19.
A number of PDBs highlighted progress in building environmental, social, or full SDG 
screening criteria into the credit allocation process, so that SDG alignment is a core part 
of the process, not an ‘ex-post’ rationalization. For example, TSKB in Türkiye has very detailed 
credit evaluation criteria which integrates environmental aspects and climate risk evaluations. 
This is one way in which sustainability can be embedded into all businesses that are supported 
by the Bank. AFD and DBSA were other examples of PDBs integrating SDG-related scoring into 
project decisions, including as highlighted in DBSA’s case study.
The Development Bank of Southern Africa highlighted action in this area through 
its Climate Finance Facility (CFF). The CFF is the first time “green bank” model 
applied to an emerging market, which is established specifically to facilitate private 
investment into low-carbon, climate-resilient infrastructure in the four Rand (local 
currency)-based economies in the Southern Africa region, including South Africa, 
Namibia, Lesotho, and Eswatini. By using long-term subordinated debt and tenor 
extension as two main credit enhancement instruments, CFF prioritizes investment 
opportunities based on target country needs and priorities identified in NDCs under 
the Paris Agreement and to meet the SDGs. The CFF raised an initial $110 million, 
with DBSA and the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as two anchor funders. 
CASE: DBSA, South Africa 
CASE 04
19 
19 In related activity, in March 2021, UNDP supported China’s New Development Bank (NDB) to issue RMB 5 billion 
(USD 747 million) SDG Bond in China to finance the country’s sustainable COVID-19 recovery. This is the first time 
globally that a multilateral development bank has committed to adopt UNDP’s SDG Finance Taxonomy and Impact 
Standards. The net proceeds from the bond will be used to finance sustainable activities or processes, and deliver 
products, services or outcomes that benefit stakeholders and/or contribute to solutions related to SDGs in NDB’s 
member countries.
Research analysis and key findings 31
Desenvolve São Paolo have a loan allocation program that has an explicit set 
of metrics that need to be met in order to quality in relation to SDG criteria, 
part of which has a focus on social issues including gender equality in business. 
Figure 9 shows an extract from their framework, which draws out the gender 
related metrics that are included in the social eligibility criteria. As shown in the 
extract from their Social eligibility criteria, one criteria relates to business that 
are majority owned by a women. A second relates to ‘medium-sized companies 
owned by Afro-descendants’ to target another area of significant inequality.
Case: Desenvolve SP, Brazil 
CASE 05
Figure 9: Gender-focused extract from Desenvolve SP Loan social eligibility criteria
Reflecting one of the key issues raised for action below, the need to try and improve 
the cost and duration of financing was repeatedly raised as a challenge for the coming 
years. This issue was raised by TSKB and BICE, among others. The likely future rising path 
for interest rates to offset inflationary pressures globally will make debates on the cost of 
finance of increasing important in the coming years and hence the role for concessional finance 
potentially more significant. The cost of finance has been debated for many years in relation to 
development lending, including the work of the PDBs. Often the degree of concessionality will 
depend on the level of GDP of a given country, and not according to the positive impact of the 
project on a metric such as the SDGs. This is not a simple area, but the key point from the PDBs 
was more the relative funding to commercial actors in their countries than the income-level 
based allocation of resources.
5.5 (Ensure women’s full 
and effective participation)
5.a (Undertake reforms to 
give women equal rights to 
economic resources)
8.2 (Achieve higher levels 
of economic productivity 
through diversification, 
technological upgrading, 
and innovation)
Loans or other financial support to MSMEs 
that meet any of the following criteria:
• Micro entrepreneurs (MEI), micro and 
small companies with sales up to R$ 
4.8 million, or
• Medium-sized companies owned 
by women, meaning 50% + 1 of the 
shares are owned by a woman or 
women: or
• Medium-sized companies owned by 
Afro-descendants, mening 50% + 1 of 
the shares are owned by a person or 
persons of African descent; or
Research analysis and key findings 32
One aspect of the cost of financing, in addition to the interest rate and term, was the need 
to reduce transaction costs of accessing loans and de-risking mechanisms such as guar-
antee funds. The volume of money available has increased for some PDBs, but the complexity 
and delays in accessing it is an issue. This was particularly the case for the smaller PDBs. The 
project documentation can be extensive, the time between submission to decision can be very 
long and there can be many requests for extra information. Linked to the cost of funding 
was how to deal with the currency risk when receiving external support in USD (or other 
currencies) but lending-on in local currency. Given the very international and challenging 
nature of this problem, it is no surprise that it was a key issue identified for the G20 and others, 
rather than one on which there were clear plans that just had to be implemented. Continued 
innovation in the availability of instruments and guarantee facilities more generally was also 
identified as useful.
The need to continue to boost project pipelines further to have more projects that are 
bankable and can meet the criteria from development partners was raised by a number 
of PDBs. Support to develop and prepare projects have helped, but PDBs still find that a lot of 
potential partners e.g., in municipalities are not able to develop bankable plans – as raised for 
example by BICE in Argentina.
CDP , in its role as Italy’s Development Finance Institution, signed a € 100 million 
loan in August 2022 in favor of the Africa Finance Corporation (AFC). AFC is one 
of the major multilateral development banks operating in the African continent, 
whose shareholders include over 30 states, as well as leading African financial 
institutions. This first collaboration between CDP and AFC targets investments in 
the fields of renewable energy, energy efficiency and sustainable infrastructure in 
Africa, contributing to SDGs 7, 9, 13 and 17. In line with its new 2022-2024 Strategic 
Plan, CDP’s initiatives promote inclusive growth of emerging markets and devel -
oping countries, further expanding the impact of Italy’s international investments 
and contributing to European efforts to implement key projects in Africa.
The partnership with a leading African multilateral development bank allows CDP 
to leverage AFC’s deep knowledge of the local context. This will help to finance proj-
ects that are on top of Africa’s sustainable development and ecological transition 
agenda, thus maximizing the impact on SDGs. Partnerships among Development 
Finance Institutions builds bridges for development finance to effectively reach 
emerging economies and mobilize resources where and when they are most 
needed.
Case: Italy, CDP 
CASE 06
Research analysis and key findings 33
NAFIN is a good example of how work on green bonds can be extended as part 
of alignment with the SDGs to support the placement of Sustainability Bonds. 
After issuing the first green bond in Mexico in 2015 (for USD 500m), NAFIN issued 
a second green bond in 2016 and in 2017 issued the first social bond in Mexico 
for 4 billion Pesos (USD 200 m). NAFIN produced a comprehensive document to 
show the link from the SDGs and the Mexican government’s national priorities 
through into the work of NAFIN as a PBD. The bond was also reviewed by an 
external party - Sustainalytics - who published a (positive) opinion on the bond 
(Sustainalytics, 2021).  
Case: NAFIN, Mexico 
CASE 07
5.3 Data, Measurement, Impact and Taxonomies 
Nearly all of the PDBs highlighted the importance of developing data, monitoring and 
evaluation as part of aligning the operation of the financial institution with the SDG agenda 
yet progress on measuring and portfolio-level SDG alignment was less pronounced. This was 
considered to be difficult and essential. DBSA in South Africa had put a significant amount of 
attention into this area by increasing the collection of data directly and from recipients of sup-
port, and the resources to monitor and evaluate the new data. BICE in Argentina had started to 
pilot the use of explicit control groups to explore the real impact of interventions.  Some PDBs 
had not historically even collected gender disaggregated data on the recipients or beneficiaries 
of investments which clearly prevents any chance of monitoring or evaluating gender impacts.
For all of the PDBs, greater transparency and reporting internally and externally have 
been an important part of recent changes. CDP in Italy have put the actions they have 
undertaken so far into an integrated report that was drafted in compliance with the Italian 
non-financial disclosure decree and external standards. These included the Global Reporting 
Initiative20(GRI) of the International Integrated Reporting Council 21(IIRC), the Sustainability 
Accounting Standards Board22(SASB) and the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate 
Related Financial Disclosures 23(TCFD).  The number of different initiatives, even if each is 
bringing greater simplicity and clarity highlights the challenge for a smaller PDB and hence 
the need for support and assistance. BICE highlighted the lack of a common taxonomy across 
commercial banks, PDBs and other investors and no PDBs said that these issues were absent24.
2021 22 23 24
20 https://www.globalreporting.org/about-gri/ 
21 https://www.integratedreporting.org/the-iirc-2/council/
22 https://www.sasb.org/
23 https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/
24 In a related initiative, UNDP is partnering with the European Investment Fund (EIF) to develop its Impact Measure-
ment and Management (IMM) to integrate SDG-aligned impact management into its investment portfolio, particu-
larly in planned Guarantee Instruments under European Fund for Sustainable Development (ESFD). The model can 
be scaled to other MDBs, DFIs, and financial institutions at global and country levels.
Research analysis and key findings 34
Figure 11: Rating from 1 – 10 of challenges faced by PDBs
However, measuring and monitoring the impact remains quite challenging  as only just 
over half of the PDBs in the survey said that they measured and managed the impact of their 
activities against the SDGs (Annex C, Figure 10). This seems surprisingly low given the overall 
positive scores to PDBs’ strategic alignment with the SDGs. Also, for the question where PDBs 
were asked to rate 16 different potential challenges from 1 (low) to 10 (high) importance, impact 
assessment and measurement shows relatively higher scores than strategy and governance25  
(Figure 11). It aligns with the broad narrative from all the research that the key issue for PDBs 
is not whether they are either willing to or can, but that “how” they do this in practical terms. 
25
25 The graph shows that all of the potential challenges are difficult for a significant proportion. None have less than 
60% of the PDBs scoring them between 8-10. The middle category sees around 70% of the top three ratings and 
the most challenging category have over 80% of PDBs rating them an 8-10 in terms of difficulty.
Impact assesment
De-risking instruments (credit insurance, debt 
swaps, etc.)
IMPORTANCE
Not at all Important (left) - Most Important (right)
Q: Challenges faced by PDBs
Co-investment to unlock transformative proj -
ects where scale is a barrier for a PDB to lead a 
particular project
Developing a low-cost disclosure framework 
for ESG and SDG reporting that is affordable 
for small PDBs as well as MSMEs in developing 
countries
Use of guarantees to reduce the cost of finance
The potential role for PDBs participating in 
green bond and green loan markets
Establishing SDG and thematic bond frame -
works and standards
Use of digital technologies to reduce the costs 
of sustainable finance operations
Market intelligence to identify SDG-enabling 
investment opportunities and accelerate SDG-
aligned investment
Board SDG training
Collaboration between national and sub-na -
tional PDBs to help share knowledge and 
expertise across countries and organizations
Portfolio alignment strategies
Developing collaboration between the private 
sector investors and company recipients of 
investment and the PDBs
Developing measurable commitments to incor-
porating climate / SDG impact criteria in the 
operations of PDBs
ESG risk management
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Research analysis and key findings 35
Some of the PDBs have proactively integrated a gender lens into the project and credit 
allocation process, whilst for others this is still work in progress. In the DBSA in South 
Africa, there are environment, institutional, social and gender specialists who go out as part 
of the project appraisal teams. They do their own due diligence on the project.  The investment 
committee will not allow submission of projects without the consideration of wider issues as 
needed. This is a key part of genuinely mainstreaming gender as required by SDG 5. CDP in  
Italy also include gender related targets for their own organization, as well as for the projects 
and partners with whom they invest.
When PDBs were asked if they track financing by whether it supported the mitigation of climate 
impact or adaptation to new approaches, they showed the lack of focus on the split in finance 
between these approaches. For example, a PDB could work with a fossil fuel power plant to 
reduce the level of pollution or invest in a renewable energy company. But limited percentage 
of the PDBs – 10 of the 28 PDBs or 36% - shows that PDBs could not produce materials that 
showed the flows cut by this metric (Annex C, Figure 12).
How to identify impacts and get the right data from the companies and financial inter -
mediaries once they receive the funding was a recurring theme on which more action 
was needed in the future. Some PDBs had done a lot in this area, but few were content that 
they had all the data they needed, or that it was simple to ensure that the recipients of funding 
supplied the broader set of reporting data needed to show impact relative to the SDGs. This 
challenge in obtaining and using the data to measure and publish impact was partly seen in 
the answers to a question on producing figures on the wider benefits of projects, as nearly 
two-thirds of the sample produced such figures (Annex C, Figure 13). 
Pressure from investors and customers has pushed greater data and disclosure from private 
sector banks and companies. PDB could also respond to pressure from their investors and 
shareholders – which are typically governments - as well as bond holders and investment part-
ners. Strategically, a number of PDBs identified the need for KPIs for the overall portfolio as well 
as specific project to properly embed measurement of impact relative to the SDGs. 
In relation to this, a common framework to measure sustainability and have a clear bench-
mark would be seen as useful because the PDBs saw too many frameworks and approaches. 
Hence this is an area on which G20 action would be useful. This would also help to reduce the 
complexity (and cost) of alignment, which was clearly a bigger issue for smaller national and 
sub-national PDBs.
Research analysis and key findings 36
The way in which the Industrial Development Bank of Türkiye maps SDG impact 
within sub-themes is a good example of how to drive SDG alignment through the 
organizations. TSKB sets the targets for SDG impact and has aligned the portfolio so 
far so that almost 90% of the lending book cover one or two of the SDGs. TSKB also 
quantifies lending targets for SDGs as part of the process. As Figure 14 shows, this 
has come in recent years after a multi-year process of internal reform and external 
collaboration in which a focus on measuring and impact targets have been a key 
feature. So, TSKB’s examples aim to show a movement beyond simple mapping of 
activities to the SDGs and towards the deeper changes that are needed to align 
activities in a meaningful way to achieving the SDGs.
Case: TSKB, Türkiye  
CASE 08
Impact Standards for PDBs 
to integrate SDG-aligned impact measurement 
and decision making into their portfolios 
BOX 2
OECD-UNDP Impact Standards for Financing Sustainable Development (IS-FSD) were 
developed to provide a framework for donors, development finance institutions such as PDBs 
and private sector partners to incorporate impacts relevant to the SDGs that are often ignored 
in measurement of investment projects. These include aspects such as the protection of 
human rights and local stakeholder consultation among many other issues. Adopting the 
IS-FSD approach leads to project measurement of financial returns as well as positive impact 
on sustainable development, and improves the transparency of development results.
The Standards were recognized by the Finance in Common (FiC) Joint Declaration (2020) and 
commitments from the public development banks (PDB) coalition. UNDP is supporting the 
resulting Finance in Common Coalition on Social Investment, and the workstream on Impact 
Monitoring and Measurement (IMM) for PDBs.
In particular, UNDP SDG Impact Standards for enterprises, bond issuers and private 
equity funds provide an organizing framework and internal management practice to help 
Development Finance Institutions and PDBs integrate sustainability and SDG-aligned impact 
in strategy, management, transparency, and governance which then impacts their portfolio 
and business partners. By aligning with the Standards, all development finance actors 
can show their intention to contribute positively to SDGs. The management standards are 
voluntary and consistent with existing high-level principles, filling gaps in current market 
approaches that undermine efforts to achieve sustainability and the SDGs.
Research analysis and key findings 36
Research analysis and key findings 37
Figure 14: TSKB’s Journey towards detailed SDG Alignment Measurement
7
Climate Risk Report
Milestones of the Sustainability Journey 
TSKB has placed sustainability at the heart of 
its business model since its establishment. In 
this direction, the Bank operates by focusing on 
combating and adapting to climate change.
TSKB and Sustainability
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2019
2020
2021
1980
1990
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
º Environmental factors were integrated into the loan evaluation processes for the ﬁ rst time  
º The practice of using renewable energy resources to meet th e Bank's electricity demand was implemen ted
The ﬁ rst GRI-approved Sustainability Report was published º
The ﬁ rst Turkish bank to obtain an ISO 14064 Certiﬁcat e   º
The Sustainability Committee was established    º
The ﬁ rst Green/SRI Bond in Turkey and the CEEMEA Region was issued   º
Founding signatory for the UNEP FI Principles for Responsible Banking   º
Director of IDFC Climate Facility Coordination Unit   º
TSKB's 3rd issuance of sustainable bonds     º
Became a TCFD Supporter and joined the TCFD Phase 3 Banking Pilot Program     º
  TSKB's Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Policy was announced    º
º Escarus, which operates in the ﬁeld of sustainability consultancy, was established 
º The ﬁrst su bordinated sustainable bond in the world was issued 
º The Climate Risks Working Group was established 
º The Green Swan Platform was established 
º Joined the TCFD Phase 2 Banking Pilot Program 
º The SDG mapping study for the loan portfolio was completed
º Finance in Common Summit; Signatory to Sustainable and Resilient 
Global Recovery, Biodiversity and Gender Equality and Women's 
Empowerment Declarations
º Best Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Risk Score in Turkey
º The ﬁrst loan based on the SDG loan model was extended in Turkey
º The ﬁrst club loan in dexed to the ESG Risk Rating in Turkey
º The ﬁrst su stainable lea se certiﬁca te in the world was issued
º The "ERET Mo del for Working Capital Loans" was developed 
º The ﬁrst Allocation and Impact Reporting for green/sustainability bond issuanc es in Turkey
º The ﬁrst In tegrated Report in Turkish Financial Sector 
º Inclusion in the BIST S ustainability Index
Implementation of the Z ero Carbon Banking Principles was initiat ed  º
º EMS was established
º The ﬁ rst Turkish bank qualiﬁ ed to obtain an ISO 14001 Certiﬁcat e 
The ﬁ rst environmental loan was disbursed 
The Environmental Policy was announced º
The Environmental Policy and the Environmental Management System (EMS) w ere revised as   º
 the Sustainability Policy and the Sustainability Management System (SMS) respectively  
º The Environmental and Social Risk Evaluation Tool (ERET ) was designed
º The practice of assessing all investment projects under the ER ET Model was introduced 
º The Sustainability Policy was updated 
º Signatory to the IDFC Climate Action in Financial Institution s
 Climate Change Declaration    º
º The ﬁ rst CDP Climate Change Report was published
Research analysis and key findings 38
2627 
26 There are also regional examples of this vital activity. The Working Group on Sustainable Finance Taxonomies in 
Latin America and the Caribbean (GTT-LAC) is developing common sustainable finance taxonomies for the LAC re-
gion. GTT-LAC is an initiative of LAC Ministers of Environment. It includes the United Nations Environment Program 
(UNEP), the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLAC), the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 
the World Bank Group, the Inter-American Bank of Development Bank (IADB), Development Bank of Latin America 
(CAF), and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 
27 Collaboration can also be useful between multinational groups. For example, under its ‘Business Call to Action’, 
UNDP partners with ADB’s private sector department to support ADB to identify and measure the impact of inclu-
sive business models across sectors to support the ‘Inclusive Business Finance Program’ to scale ADB’s financing 
activities in five countries in South Asia to help achieve the SDGs.
A final important theme from the broader introductory discussions, was the importance 
of current and future collaborations and learning from shared experience – both intra-
country and across countries/regions.  The within country dialogue was important, for 
example the sub-national PDB Desenvolve SP (São  Paolo) in Brazil, was benefiting from the 
experience (and transfer of key staff) from another innovative sub-national PDB in Brazil, the 
Development Bank of Minais Gerais (BDMG). Another part of the intra-country dialogue could 
be seen in the role that BICE in Argentina was playing in national discussions on improving 
the ‘taxonomies’ for investment, so that there is clearer agreement across all kinds of banks of 
what it means for example for an investment to be pro-gender equality. These specific examples 
are supplemented by the many examples that relate to the core purpose of a national PDB to 
show leadership and demonstration effects by investing in supposedly difficult or challenging 
or innovative projects that the private sector lenders can then follow26.
PDBs have also played a proactive role in trying to develop the sustainability discussion 
across the financial sector in their own countries. BICE in Argentina is a leading member of 
the group of organisations developing sustainability definitions for local investors. As a member 
of the banking association of Türkiye, TSKB heads the sustainability working group, which 
includes commercial banks and public development banks, and regulation agency. 
The cross-border sharing of expertise – and finance – was highlighted as another important 
part of the story towards developing a PDB and its impacts on the SDGs. This was high -
lighted by the sub-national development bank BDMG with a significant collaboration with the 
European Investment Bank (EIB), by Desenvolve SP with the Inter-American Development Bank, 
by NAFIN in Mexico and their collaboration with KfW and GIZ in Germany, or TSKB and its 
collaborations with the EBRD, the IBRD and the IFC. International collaboration or influence can 
also have an impact where PDBs seek accreditation with global standards – such as the Green 
Climate Fund – which is discussed in more detail below.
Improving access to finance not only from within the country, but also from regional 
and global development finance institutions, is an important area for progress so far for 
many PDBs as well as also requiring more work in the future.  For example, the Develop -
ment Bank of Rwanda highlighted that improving alignment between their priorities and the 
national development plan has helped improve access to domestic financing (which requires 
of course that the national development plan is aligned to the SDGs). The Development Bank 
of Namibia highlighted the benefits of their close collaboration with Germany’s KfW and the 
African Development Bank in their 2021 Annual Report (DBN, 2021)27.
5.4 Effective Collaboration and International Support
Research analysis and key findings 39
24 out of 28 PDBs also responded saying that restrictions were not necessarily the issue for 
collaboration in terms of any legal, governance, and economic barriers against joining interna-
tional initiatives on the initiatives such as Equator Principles and  the United Nations Principles 
for Responsible Banking. Only 4 of the 28 PDBs responded there were restrictions on collabo-
ration (Annex C, Figure 15).
The role of the PDB as a connector between international finance and national projects 
and companies was raised by a number of PDBs as an area in which they have made progress. 
Again, it was also raised by a number as an area on which they were planning to focus more in 
the future. For example, PT-SMI developed the blended finance platform of ‘SDG Indonesia 1’ 
to get more international funding to help improve project quality so that there is a better quality 
pipeline. The new facility Includes resources to review projects. They can act as a connector 
for both donors and the clients to reduce cost and complexity and improve impact for both. 
NAFIN in Mexico have developed ‘fondos sostenible NAFIN – NAFIN Sustainable Finance’ where 
they act as the trustee to receive and administer donations from international organization for 
projects in Mexico. This role of international finance was also emphasized by the Development 
Bank of Namibia, who have for example a specific green credit line with KfW in Germany to 
support projects in Namibia. They also place bonds on local market so that they have both 
domestic and international sources of finance.
A generic challenge raised by a number of PDBs was the need to build alignment domesti-
cally, and internationally, between government, regulators, PDBs and the private sector. 
There were many different initiatives and an increasing number of actions, but it was important 
to try and make sure that these efforts were directed in complementary ways. This was linked 
with the fact that some PDBs had to update their mandate, or parts of their internal regulations. 
This is happening in the context of FiCS through a dialogue with the D20 Long-Term Investors 
Club (which supports FiCS efforts to scale-up private sector’s mobilization in sustainable finance), 
BICE  has developed and started to implement a new ‘Green Line’ as part of its 
promotion of risk mitigation instruments and investment financing in renewable 
energy and energy efficiency. A critical role was played by the Inter-American 
Development Bank and the Green Climate Fund. This case is useful for the benefits 
of international collaboration, as well as the development of new facilities. Projects 
are for Small and Medium Sized business in Argentina and can support a range 
of activities. So far it has supported 5 renewable energy plants with USD 20 m in 
financing and 83 Energy efficiency projects with USD 40 m in financing.
Case: BICE, Argentina 
CASE 09
Research analysis and key findings 40
as well as by promoting a whole-of-the-financial-system dialogue with some of the major global 
alliances and coalitions, such as the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) and the 
Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ). This links to the overall governance challenge 
of creating new aligned strategies that are implemented with the clear support of the Board 
and empowered and enabled organizations.
Gaining international accreditations has been important for a number of PDBs and should 
be supported. For example, among PDB interviewees, AFD in France, NAFIN in Mexico, CDP in 
Italy, CDG Capital in Morocco, DBSA in South Africa, and PTSMI in Indonesia have all achieved 
accreditation from the Green Climate Fund 28. NAFIN in Mexico have worked with the Global 
Green Growth Institute (GGGI) 29 who provided a diagnostic on gaps in relation to ESG and 
created an action plan for specific activities to put in place in the short, medium and long-term. 
As a result, a new public gender policy was produced and is awaiting final publication as well 
as an action plan on gender (including indicators). Greater clarity and harmonization on which 
international accreditations would be most useful was highlighted as a challenge to overcome. 
This is because it can be overwhelming to a smaller PDB to work out where best to allocate 
scarce resources for accreditation or adoption of particular standards – a theme that was raised 
by private sector participants in the 2021 G20 SFWG dialogue on financing the SDGs.
Another key challenge yet requires continued efforts is to develop and emphasize the 
national and sub-national PDB role in connecting external ‘global’ finance to the local 
recipients in a country or region who would make best use of the resources. The role of 
PDBs in connecting the ‘last mile’ was identified as extremely important – and progress in this 
area was seen as likely to be supported by the PDBs ensuring they continued their own reform 
program, whilst also raising their profile in through international discussions. 
Some of the PDBs noted the significant challenge of meeting expectations from stake -
holders where there is a demand for instant results and faster progress. PT-SMI for example 
raised the need to understand and tackle stakeholder expectations and to work in parallel to 
get international support to help achieve ambitious targets.
Support for PDBs from domestic and international actors, including the sharing of expe-
rience and best practices in the regional PDB networks and through FiCS globally, was 
considered to be important going forward.  Technical cooperation with multilateral develop-
ment banks was highlighted as something that was needed going forward to help internalize 
the complexity of SDGs. 
2829 
 
28 Accredited Entities | Green Climate Fund
29 Global Green Growth Institute — A resilient world through inclusive and sustainable green growth (gggi.org)
Conclusion41
Conclusion
Conclusion41
This report based on the interviews and the survey, along with the additional materials 
from the PDBs helps design recommendations for action by a range of actors, as expressed 
by national PDBs themselves. These are set out in four broad categories related to: (i) 
PDBs’ mandates, strategies, and governance alignment to SDGs; (ii) Lending, guarantees, 
pricing and currency risks; (iii) data, measurement, impact and taxonomies; and (iv) effec-
tive collaboration and international support. 
PDBs are a diverse group, so not all findings and recommendations will apply, but they provide 
a good cross-section of the types of actions that will help these vital organizations go further 
to align their activities with the SDGs. Equally, these recommendations provide us a sense 
of how those able to assist the PDBs - including national governments, G20, MDBs, UNDP , 
FiCS, as well as regional and global PDB networks – could collaborate with each other - from 
ensuring clear commitments to developing SDG-aligned strategies to ensuring impact from 
their implementation. 
UNDP and FiCS are committed to working with all interested parties to bring these new 
findings and recommendations to a wide audience – and to support tangible actions 
to help PDBs continue to expand their potential and relevance to meeting the SDGs, 
through dialogue, technical assistance, partnership platforms and engagements with 
national governments. The hope of UNDP and FiCS is that all development partners, nationally, 
regionally and internationally, will be able to find ways to help PDBs through implementing 
recommendations identified in this work. 
Given the aforementioned research scope and methodology, certain topics have been identi-
fied for further rigorous policy research, including but not limited to:
6
Review of the governance structure 
of PDBs and their impact on SDG-
aligned investments
Review of the data on actual 
impacts made through the SDG-
aligned investments
Moving Forward
03
Analysis of PDB’s experiences with a wider representation of 
PDBs by ownership structure, geographical operation, asset 
size, maturity levels, official mandate, and income levels of 
their home countries 
01 02
References42
AFD (2022) ‘AFD Tool for Mainstreaming the SDGs: The Sustainable Development Analysis and 
Opinion Mechanism’, June 2022, Agence France de Développement
Attridge, S, Chen, Y and Mbate, M. (2021) ‘Financial performance and corporate governance: 
evidence from national development banks in Africa’, March 2021, Overseas Development 
Institute, London
https://odi.org/en/press/reduce-political-influence-and-tighten-governance-to-improve-finan-
cial-performance-of-national-development-banks/ 
DBN (2021) ‘Annual Report and Accounts 2020/21, Development Bank of Namibia’, 2021, Wind-
hoek, https://www.dbn.com.na/phocadownload/annual-report-dbn-2020-21-b.pdf 
European Think Tanks Group (2021) ‘Financing the 2030 Agenda: An SDG alignment framework 
for Public Development Banks’, October 2021, 
IDDRI (2020) ‘Scaling up public development banks’ transformative alignment with the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development’, Study No 5, October 2020, Paris https://www.iddri.
org/sites/default/files/PDF/Publications/Catalogue%20Iddri/Etude/202010-ST0520-publis%20
dev%20banks.pdf 
INSE, AFD (2021)- The Institute of New Structural Economics at Peking University and French 
Development Agency ‘Mapping 500+ Development Banks: Qualification Criteria, Stylized Facts, 
and Development Trends’, October 2021, Beijing.
Finance in Common (2022) ‘Finance in Common Progress Report to the G20’, July 2022, Paris
G20 Italian Presidency (2021) ‘G20 Sustainable Finance Roadmap’, October 2021. 
Griffith-Jones, S. and Ocampo, J. A. (Eds) 2018 ‘The Future of National Development Banks’, 
October 2018, Oxford University Press https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198827948.001.0001 
NAFIN (2021) ’Sustainability Bond Framework’, Nacional Financiera, November, 2021, Mexico 
https://www.nafin.com/portalnf/files/secciones/emisiones-relaciones-internacionales/capta -
cion/documentos/BonoSostenibleMEX_ENG_Final.pdf 
Review of Political Economy, Volume 34, Issue 2 (2022) https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/
crpe20/34/2 
Sustainalytics (2021) ‘Second-Party Opinion Nacional Financiera S.N.C., I.B.D (NAFIN) 
Sustainability Bond Framework’, October 2021, Mexico City NAFIN_Sustainability_Bond_Frame-
work_Second-Party_Opinion_291021.pdf
TSKB (2021) “Climate Risk Report on Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)”, 
May 2021, Istanbul TCFD-eng-2021-05-24.pdf (tskb.com.tr) 
UN (2022) “International financial system and development: Report of the Secretary-General” 
Report A/77/224, July 2022, New York, https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3985258?ln=en 
UNDP 2022 ‘Integrated National Financing Frameworks: A Short and Practical Introduction’ May 
2022, Integrated National Financing Frameworks https://inff.org 
References
References42
Annex A: Interview Questions43
What are the biggest opportunities or developments in capacity you are 
planning to use in the next few years to go further?
The G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group30 focusses on actions that member 
states can take in collaboration with other countries and with regional and global 
groups. Thinking about the biggest challenges you face, what actions by the G20 
would be most useful to support you in enhancing your work to achieve the SDGs?
What are the biggest challenges that remain to your organization 
maximizing its impact on the SDGs?
Please outline any additional information or material you feel would be useful to 
help the G20 delegates in their discussions on Scaling Up Sustainable Finance.
30 
30 Please see https://g20sfwg.org/ for more details on the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group
Q8
Q7
Q6
Q5
Please briefly outline the role of your organization
(The interview team will be familiar with the publicly available information 
but it is useful to hear a description of the organization in your own words).
If you were to highlight one area of your recent work to use as a case study to 
showcase the importance of the PDB role in achieving the SDGs, what would it be? 
(Please elaborate on what happened. Please also refer to any documents on the experience.)
Please briefly outline the work you have been doing with the Finance in 
Common Coalition (FiCS) in the past 2 years. In which of the FiCS working 
groups have you participated?
What are the biggest challenges you have already overcome, or started to 
overcome in the past 5 years on the road to aligning your work with the SDGs 
– for example in relation to strategy, governance, data, operations, culture, 
financing instruments or other issues?
Q4
Q3
Q2
Q1
Annex A: 
Interview Questions
Annex B: Survey Questions44
31 
31 A definition of SDG-alignment was contained in the UNDP/OECD Framework for SDG Aligned Finance, where the 
Global Investors for Sustainable Development Alliance (GISD) suggested:
 “Sustainable development investing refers to deploying capital in ways that make a positive contribution to sus-
tainable development, using the SDGs as a basis for measurement”. Yet beyond creating a net positive impact over 
the life of the investment, our ambition should also be to aim that investment does no harm across the SDGs. 
 SDG alignment is both a means to mobilize resources for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and a value prop-
osition for private sector to preserve the long-term value of assets by doing no harm and contributing solutions to 
sustainable development challenges, thereby reducing risks and enhancing resilience of the global financial system. 
This double materiality (financial and non-financial) of the SDG alignment agenda relies on the achievement of two 
objectives: 1. Equality: resources should be mobilised to leave no one behind and fill the SDG financing gaps, and 
2. Sustainability: resources should accelerate progress across the SDGs.
Introduction
Please provide a link that shows your organization’s mandate. Does it prioritize climate actions 
and the SDGs at all levels?
Please briefly explain your strategy development process – highlighting how many years your 
current strategy covers, when it was decided and when the next revision will be made.
Is SDG-alignment31 a core part of the strategy process or do you map the existing strategy and 
activities to the SDGs retrospectively?
SDGs fully incorporated into the organisational strategy
Yes
SDGs only partly incorporated into the organisational strategy
No
Some limited areas aligned to the SDGs, but strategy not generally aligned
Strategy not aligned to the SDGs, but some retrospective mapping occurs
Strategy not aligned and activities are not mapped to the SDGs
Annex B: 
Survey Questions
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
[Only applicable to respondents who checked SDGs fully/only partly incorporated into the orga-
nizational strategy] Since what year has your strategy process been integrating SDG alignment? 
Annex B: Survey Questions45
32 33
32 Voluntary National Reviews | High-Level Political Forum
33 https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/34480/ACF.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Does your strategy mention your country’s ‘Voluntary National Review 32’ or national develop-
ment plan/strategy linked to the SDGs and focus on the same areas of development?
Does your strategy mention your country’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) and 
Long-term low green-house gas emissions development strategy (LTS)?33
Do you identify how your financing is split between supporting the mitigation of climate impact 
mitigation compared to adaptation to new approaches that have a lower climate impact? If so, 
please specify what percentage is focused on mitigation and what percentage on adaption.
Are there any legal / governance / economic / capacity barriers that prevent your organization 
from joining international initiatives on the SDGs for examples initiatives such as the Equator 
Principles, the United Nations Principles for Responsible Banking or others? 
Yes to both
Yes
Yes
If yes, what percentage of finance on is focused on mitigation 
and what percentage on adaptation
Yes
Yes to NDC only
No
No
No
Yes to LTS only
No to both
Please provide examples in relation to legal, governance, economic or capacity barriers as 
appropriate.
Annex B: Survey Questions46
Q10
Q11
Q12
What are the biggest challenges you have already overcome, or started to overcome in the past 
5 years to align your work with the SDGs – for example in relation to strategy, governance, data, 
operations, culture, financing instruments or other issues?
What are the top 3 biggest challenges for your organization to promote, develop, and imple -
ment changes so that investments support the SDGs?  Please select three from the list below.
Ensuring consistency between investment choices and the imperative of sustainability
Considering trade offs when an investment helps one SDG but may not help a different 
SDG.
Lack of understanding in common language on SDG alignment SDG.
Developing a comprehensive portfolio with SDG lens rather than a pipeline of good 
individual projects
Lack of political backing and support from other partners including MDBs and the 
government 
Developing and improving transparency, monitoring, oversight, grievance, and 
accountability mechanisms
Lack of internal capacity to implement a transition finance framework 
Lack of opportunities to learn from other public development banks’ knowledge and 
experiences
Other (please specify)
Do you measure and manage the impact of your activities against the SDGs? 
Yes
No
Annex B: Survey Questions47
Q13
Q14
Q15
Q16
Q17
Q18
How do you measure the impact of your activities against the SDGs? Please reference any 
national, regional or global standards that you use or any third-party monitoring of your activ-
ities that is produced. If available, please provide the link to the annual sustainability report. 
Do you produce figures on the wider benefits of projects and the detail of the beneficiaries (e.g. 
by gender or income level) in addition to figures on the financial costs and returns of a project?
What are the biggest opportunities or developments in capacity you are planning to use in the 
next few years to advance your efforts in scaling up sustainable finance?
If you were to highlight one area of your recent work as a case study for the PDB role in financing 
the SDGs or scaling sustainable financing instruments, what would it be? Please elaborate on 
what happened. Please also refer to any documents on the experience.
What are the most successful services that your organization provides to MSMEs (Medium, Small 
and Micro Enterprises) for better access in financing? 
What are the biggest challenges you find in measuring the impact of your investments?
Yes
No
Annex B: Survey Questions48
Q19
Q20
Rate where your organization is now in relation to the following 4 areas on a scale of 1-10 - 
where 1 is no progress and 10 is fully achieving all aspects of alignment of your activities with 
the SDGs. Please provide any comments that help explain your rating if needed.
Rate where you think your organization was 5 years ago against the same 4 areas  on a 
scale of 1-10 - where 1 is no progress and 10 is fully achieving all aspects of alignment of your 
activities with the SDGs. Please provide any comments that help explain your rating if needed.
Internally leading and fostering a sustainable development-oriented culture 
(e.g. require qualifications in strategic sustainable development areas when hiring new 
financial aspects; related capacity development efforts; and ensuring regular monitoring 
and development of these skills in performance appraisals)
Internally leading and fostering a sustainable development-oriented culture 
(e.g. require qualifications in strategic sustainable development areas when hiring new 
financial aspects; related capacity development efforts; and ensuring regular monitoring 
and development of these skills in performance appraisals)
Developing a holistic strategy and long-term vision linked to SDGs 
(e.g. PDB’s strategy, mission, vision and other medium- and long-term frameworks 
are in place, and linked to strategic choices made in daily operations)
Developing a holistic strategy and long-term vision linked to SDGs 
(e.g. PDB’s strategy, mission, vision and other medium- and long-term frameworks 
are in place, and linked to strategic choices made in daily operations)
Mainstreaming SDG priorities within internal operations 
(e.g. a systematic and coherent internal process for analyzing finance with SDG 
considerations are embedded in both the ex-ante and ex-post phases of investment)
Mainstreaming SDG priorities within internal operations 
(e.g. a systematic and coherent internal process for analyzing finance with SDG 
considerations are embedded in both the ex-ante and ex-post phases of investment)
Mobilizing and catalyzing truly transformational investment 
(e.g. new competencies and incentive structures within organizations like project 
preparation facilities to ensure SDG bankability)
Mobilizing and catalyzing truly transformational investment 
(e.g. new competencies and incentive structures within organizations like project 
preparation facilities to ensure SDG bankability)
Annex B: Survey Questions49
Q21
Considering the biggest challenges you face, please rate the following issues on a scale 
of 1-10 in terms of importance to help your organization, where 1 is not at all important 
and 10 is the most important?
Collaboration between national and sub-national PDBs to help share knowledge and 
expertise across countries and organizations
Developing collaboration between the private sector investors and company recipients of 
investment and the PDBs
Developing measurable commitments to incorporating climate/SDG impact criteria in the 
operations of PDBs
Policy development to establish sustainable finance taxonomies reporting/disclosure 
and sustainable data ecosystems
Developing a low-cost disclosure framework for ESG and SDG reporting that is 
affordable for small PDBs as well as MSMEs (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises) in 
developing countries
ESG risk management
Portfolio alignment strategies
Impact assessment
Board SDG training
Use of guarantees to reduce the cost of finance
Use of digital technologies to reduce the costs of sustainable finance operations
Establishing SDG and thematic bond frameworks and standards
The potential role for PDBs participating in green bond and green loan markets
De-risking instruments (credit insurance, debt swaps, etc.)
Market intelligence to identify SDG-enabling investment opportunities and accelerate 
SDG-aligned investment 
Co-investment to unlock transformative projects where scale is a barrier for a PDB to 
lead a particular project
Q22
Please outline any additional information, examples, observations or material you feel 
would be relevant that have not been covered in this survey.
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis50
Annex C: 
Graphs from the Survey Analysis 
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis50
Figure 2: PDB mandates prioritizing climate actions and the SDGs at all levels
Figure 3: SDG alignment as a core part of the organizational strategy
Q: Is SDG-alignment a core part of the strategy or do you map 
strategy and activities to the SDGs?
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis51
Figure 5: PDB strategy mentioning country’s ‘Voluntary National Review’ or national 
  development plan/strategy linked to the SDGs
Figure 6: PDB strategy mentioning country’s Nationally Determined Contributions   
                              (NDC) and Long-term low green-house gas emissions development strategy (LTS)
Q: Does your strategy mention your country’s ‘Voluntary National Review’ or 
national development plan/strategy linked to the SDGs and focus on it?
Q: Does your strategy mention your country’s Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) and Long-term low green-house gas emissions 
development strategy?
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis52
Figure 7: Top 3 challenges to promote, develop, and implement changes to support SDGs
Figure 10: Measuring and managing the impact of your activities against the SDGs

Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis53
Figure 11: Rating from 1 – 10 of challenges faced by PDBs
Figure 12: Identifying financial split between climate impact mitigation and adaptation
Impact assesment
De-risking instruments (credit insurance, debt 
swaps, etc.)
IMPORTANCE
Not at all Important (left) - Most Important (right)
Q: Challenges faced by PDBs
Co-investment to unlock transformative proj -
ects where scale is a barrier for a PDB to lead 
a particular project
Developing a low-cost disclosure framework 
for ESG and SDG reporting that is affordable 
for small PDBs as well as MSMEs in developing 
countries
Use of guarantees to reduce the cost of finance
The potential role for PDBs participating in 
green bond and green loan markets
Establishing SDG and thematic bond frame -
works and standards
Use of digital technologies to reduce the costs 
of sustainable finance operations
Market intelligence to identify SDG-enabling 
investment opportunities and accelerate SDG-
aligned investment
Board SDG training
Collaboration between national and sub-na -
tional PDBs to help share knowledge and 
expertise across countries and organizations
Portfolio alignment strategies
Developing collaboration between the private 
sector investors and company recipients of 
investment and the PDBs
Developing measurable commitments to 
incorporating climate / SDG impact criteria in 
the operations of PDBs
ESG risk management
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis54
Figure 13: Producing financial analysis on the wider benefits and returns on the project
Figure 15: Legal/governance/economic barriers to joining international initiatives on the SDGs  
Figure 16: Internally leading and fostering a sustainable development culture
Q:
Q: Internally leading and fostering sustainable development-
oriented culture 5 years ago and now
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis55
Figure 17: Developing a holistic strategy and long-term vision linked to SDGs
Figure 18: Mainstreaming SDG priorities within internal operations
Figure 19: Mobilizing and catalyzing truly transformational investment
Q: Developing a holistic strategy and long-term vision linked to SDGs 5 years ago and now 
Q: Mainstreaming SDG priorities within internal operations 5 years ago and now
Q: Mobilizing and catalyzing truly transformational investment  5 years ago and now
Annex C:  Graphs from the Survey Analysis56
United Nations Development Programme
One United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017
www.undp.org
© UNDP 2022