2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate 
Finance for Development
Empowering the Ecosystem of Public 
Development Banks
February 2025
Presented by: Climate Policy Initiative (CPI), Third Generation Environmentalism 
(E3G), Germanwatch, Institute for Climate Economics (I4CE), and the Public Banking 
Project (PBP), with individual author contributions from Valerie Laxton (WRI) and 
Imogen Outlaw (NewClimate Institute).1 
1  The opinions and views presented are of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent opinions and views of the World Resources Institute or 
NewClimate Institute.

2
ABOUT CLIMATE POLICY INITIATIVE 
CPI is an analysis and advisory organization with deep expertise in finance and policy. Our mission is to help 
governments, businesses, and financial institutions drive economic growth while addressing climate change. 
CPI has seven offices around the world in Brazil, India, Indonesia, the South Africa, United Kingdom, and the 
United States. 
www.climatepolicyinitiative.org
ABOUT E3G 
E3G is an independent climate change think tank with a global outlook. We work on the frontier of the 
climate landscape, tackling the barriers and advancing the solutions to a safe climate. Our goal is to translate 
climate politics, economics and policies into action. 
E3G builds broad-based coalitions to deliver a safe climate, working closely with like-minded partners in 
government, politics, civil society, science, the media, public interest foundations and elsewhere to leverage 
change. 
www.e3g.org
ABOUT GERMANWATCH
Following the motto of Observing. Analysing. Acting. Germanwatch has been actively promoting global 
equi ty and livelihood preservation since 1991. We focus on the politics and economics of the Global North 
and their world-wide consequences. The situation of marginalised people in the Global South is the starting 
point for our work. Together with our members and supporters, and with other actors in civil society, we 
strive to serve as a strong lobbying force for sustainable development. We aim at our goals by advocating 
for prevention of dangerous climate change and its negative impacts, for guaranteeing food security, and for 
corporate compliance with human rights standards.
www.germanwatch.org
ABOUT THE INSTITUTE FOR CLIMATE ECONOMICS (I4CE)
The Institute for Climate Economics (I4CE) is a non-profit research organization that provides independent 
policy analysis on climate change mitigation and adaptation. We promote climate policies that are effective, 
efficient, and socially fair. Our experts engage with national and local governments, the EU, international 
financial institutions, civil society organizations, and the media.
www.i4ce.org
ABOUT THE PUBLIC BANKING PROJECT
The Public Banking Project, McMaster University, has three core aims: to provide theoretically informed and 
empirically rich understandings; to strengthen the interface between public banking scholars, policymakers, 
practitioners, and communities; and to train a new generation of public banking scholars.
www.publicbanking.mcmaster.ca
3
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
BULLETIN OVERVIEW
2025 is a pivotal year for the interlocking global agendas of climate and sustainable development, 
highlighted by major convenings such as the 5th Finance in Common Summit (FiCS), the 4th International 
Conference on Financing for Development (FfD4), the G20 Summit under South Africa’s presidency, and the 
UNFCCC COP30. Public development banks (PDBs) will feature prominently across these events, given their 
integral role in implementing these critical agendas through financial support and stakeholder mobilization. 
This policy bulletin summarizes recent research on how PDBs’ contribution to low-emissions and 
climate-resilient development can be accelerated and scaled to make progress toward the global agenda 
for sustainable development. Bolstering domestic markets and sourcing local finance is key to addressing 
the availability and the delivered cost of capital, as well as to reaching decarbonization, adaptation, and 
sustainability goals. To transition to just, net zero, and climate-resilient economies, a bottom-up approach 
will significantly accelerate change and effectiveness. Countries and domestic institutions need to be 
involved at the onset of reforms, to ensure ownership and alignment.
In particular, this bulletin synthesizes key findings across publications from our respective organizations to 
provide PDBs, shareholder governments, and other relevant stakeholders with actionable recommendations 
across the following topics:
• Operationalizing Paris Alignment and Impact Measurement
• “Public-Public” Collaborations for Climate Finance
• Mobilizing Private Finance to Meet Climate Investment Gaps
• Building Platforms for Just Transition and Sustainable Development
• Financing the Energy Transition
• Other Emerging Themes (e.g., nature finance, carbon markets, digital technology)
On an ongoing basis, this document will be updated as a reference point for evidence-based discussions 
on each of these topics, bringing together practitioners, policymakers, investors, and the broader research 
community to coordinate activities and develop solutions around common understanding and objectives.
OPERATIONALIZING PARIS ALIGNMENT AND IMPACT 
MEASUREMENT
KEY FINDINGS
Global uptake of Paris alignment commitments has struggled to make headwind in emerging markets 
and developing economies (EMDEs), despite being widely recognized as both urgent and necessary. 
• Recent tracking of PDB climate ambition indicates that only a minority of PDBs have explicitly committed 
to Paris alignment, and that the adoption rate of new climate commitments among PDBs has slowed 
since 2022 (CPI 2024).
• While providing support to individual financial institutions to align with the Paris Agreement is key, 
voluntary approaches will not be sufficient to align financial systems in developing countries (I4CE & 
NewClimate Institute 2023).
4
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
• While recent years have seen significant progress across important aspects of Paris alignment among 
members of the joint reporting multilateral development bank (MDB) group, in some cases, bilateral 
development finance institutions (DFIs) have exhibited leading approaches of their own, albeit faced 
with notably different operating contexts and constraints (E3G ongoing).
Paris alignment methodology development among PDBs varies widely, based on individual PDB contexts 
and in the absence of global criteria. While this individual development better accounts for national 
needs, it has also led to financing gaps, particularly around adaptation and a just transition.
• Where PDBs have started to implement Paris alignment, they have used a number of different project- 
and portfolio-level benchmarks to assess alignment (CPI & I4CE 2024). Alignment cannot be assessed 
by any single indicator and is an ongoing process that requires support from PDB governance structures 
and shareholders.
• When PDBs align with the Paris Agreement, they are supporting commitments made by their 
shareholders — i.e., governments —to achieve climate adaptation and mitigation goals in a fair and 
just manner that underpins these countries’ social contracts (E3G, Germanwatch, I4CE, & NewClimate 
Institute 2024).
• MDBs and NDBs often differ in their approaches to Paris alignment. These differences can be attributed 
to variation in three key areas; (1) political economy and governance; (2) public finance mandates; and 
(3) institutional capacity and expertise (CPI & E3G 2023). 
• MDBs’ Joint Reports on Climate Finance show that while the delivery of more international public 
climate finance is promising, finance for adaptation is lagging, there remains a dearth of information 
about how much is still being invested in fossil fuels, and the characteristics and terms of the financing 
for climate purposes are also crucial (WRI 2024; previous versions 2016-2023). 
• A review of MDBs’ methodologies found that they still focus more on doing no harm than on proactively 
supporting the transformation. Methodological gaps relating to activities with corporate counterparties 
and financial intermediaries lead to a risk of misalignment of such investments. Additionally, the 
MDBs’ list of activities considered universally aligned with the mitigation goals of the Paris Agreement 
needs revision and just transition considerations are not sufficiently mainstreamed in Paris alignment 
methodologies (Germanwatch 2024).
Governance and transparency still have room for improvement across all actor types.
• MDBs do not consistently publish all Paris alignment assessments of sovereign projects, falling short on 
transparency and accountability (Germanwatch 2024).
• Current practices and procedures for risk screening in policy-based operations are not suited to prevent 
policy actions from undermining government capability to promote long-term macro-fiscal stability and 
a just transition to climate neutrality by 2050 (WRI, Germanwatch, & NewClimate Institute 2022).
RECOMMENDATIONS
For convening & engagement towards collective Paris alignment: 
1. PDBs need to consider their investments from the standpoint of systematic alignment, engaging with 
shareholders, sovereign clients, financial intermediaries and corporates, other PDBs, and civil society 
to identify opportunities to address greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and improve climate resilience, 
5
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
whilst managing financial risks – physical and transition – associated with climate change, ensuring that 
engagement informs country dialogue process and programmatic work.
2. Specifically, PDBs should leverage external engagement strategies, particularly counterparty-based 
approaches, to support their counterparties’ Paris alignment, further driving transformative action 
beyond the scope of their direct financing activities.
3. MDBs should scale up proactive exchanges on best practices for climate mainstreaming at the 
institutional level. This should include engaging with the wider PDB ecosystem (such as through 
regional networks) to share lessons learned, as well as to draw on practical experience and expertise 
from institutions closer to local contexts and with different operational approaches. As a specific 
facilitation method, MDBs should introduce a phased technical assistance approach and contribute to 
the development of a public, searchable database of available technical assistance programmes and 
support, leveraging existing platforms (e.g., the Global Capacity Building Coalition, IDFC, and FiCS) for 
maximizing engagement.
For Paris alignment methodology development:
4. It is key to provide Paris alignment methodologies with sufficient weight in PDBs’ governance structures 
to facilitate mainstreaming and necessary internal changes, as well as an authoritative backbone to 
support Paris-aligned financing decisions. 
5. Public development institutions—both MDBs and the wider PDB universe—should focus beyond climate 
finance flows to a wider Paris alignment approach, which not only operationalizes the “do no harm” 
principle but also seeks to maximize ambition for climate action. This includes incorporating national 
climate plans and global climate goals into investment decisions to account for both national needs and 
global climate goals or directly supporting implementation programs with policy-based operations. 
For governance and transparency:
6. PDBs should disclose their full Paris alignment assessments and results. They should agree on a 
coherent joint standard for publishing such assessments and Paris alignment methodologies should 
include a minimum commitment to public disclosure.
“PUBLIC-PUBLIC” COLLABORATIONS FOR CLIMATE FINANCE
KEY FINDINGS
Partnerships between PDBs and other public sector entities show promise but still face substantial 
hurdles that impede scaling and impact.
• NDBs have a track record of collaborating with MDBs to access climate finance and increase their 
capacity. MDBs and NDBs have both financial and technical assistance collaborations (public-public 
collaborations), which are guided by mutual benefits. A key aspect of financial collaboration for global 
South NDBs is gaining access to hard currencies via MDBs and bilateral DFIs. These collaborations are 
highly cost- and risk- sensitive; as such, cost-benefit calculations are paramount for the NDBs  (Marois 
et al. 2025).
• On collaboration to finance adaptation between MDBs/DFIs and NDBs, MDBs, and DFIs face challenges 
including differing adaptation definitions, complex fund applications, and ticket size misalignment. 
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
NDBs struggle with limited capacity to track adaptation finance, a weak pipeline of bankable projects, 
perceived low returns of such projects, and local currency risk (CPI 2024). 
• From 2015 to 2022, MDBs provided around USD 7 billion to NDBs in the form of loans, grants, and 
technical assistance, which was then utilized to fund climate projects in EMDEs (CPI & E3G 2023). This 
figure is small relative to total MDB finance over the period, and further collaboration between MDBs 
and NDBs appears to have been impeded by barriers related to political economy and governance, policy 
mandates, and institutional capacity and expertise.
RECOMMENDATIONS
For structuring partnerships between PDBs:
1. MDBs should look to partner with NDBs to progress on their own climate finance and sustainable 
development objectives, with the latter acting as a local intermediary and facilitating project pipeline 
development. That is, MDBs should proactively develop tailored cooperation offers catering for the 
varied and, in some cases,sector -specific mandates of NDBs. If NDBs do not have any climate-related 
policies or strategies, and respective state regulation is absent, MDB cooperation can start with capacity 
building support to identify Paris-aligned projects.
2. MDBs, multilateral climate funds, and their governing boards must significantly expand low-risk, 
affordable, genuinely concessional, and transparent climate financing and grant funding to NDBs. NDB 
access to highly concessional MDB and multilateral climate financing and grants needs to be delivered 
faster and under less restrictive conditions.
3. To specifically address collaboration barriers on adaptation finance, PDBs should leverage blended 
finance expertise to bolster the adaptation business case and support regional development banks as 
adaptation hubs. PDBs of all sizes and jurisdictions should jointly develop complementary adaptation 
taxonomies to reach a shared understanding of eligible projects, promote the development of country 
platform approaches, and enhance capacity-building and knowledge-sharing initiatives on adaptation 
finance. 
4. MDBs and bilateral DFIs need to rethink technical assistance (financial and non-financial) to make it fit-
for-purpose for the domestic financing of green and just transitions vis-à-vis specific national contexts. 
That is, public-public collaborations need to be flexible, oriented toward fostering better MDB-NDB 
relations, and sensitive to local conditions. 
For PDB collaboration with other public entities:
5. PDBs should develop climate-focused engagement and capacity building strategies with relevant 
governmental agencies to foster the integration of climate considerations into national regulation 
and supervision. This would contribute to creating a supportive enabling environment, and could be 
operationalized through policy-based loans, including a technical assistance offering.
6. MDBs can offer support to partner governments where NDBs are in the process of updating mandates 
towards Paris alignment, to better utilize NDBs’ potential as important actors in the country’s climate 
transformation. This would enable partner countries to 1) ensure coherence with national climate goals, 
2) make use of NDBs’ ability to reach their specific target groups for the climate transformation, and 3) 
facilitate NDBs’ climate-related cooperation with MDBs.
7
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
For accelerating UNFCCC implementation:
7. Acting as both PDB shareholders and UN member states, national governments should call on both 
NDBs and MDBs to foster a global PDB ecosystem grounded in accountable public-public collaborations. 
To address systemic challenges such as climate change, key stakeholders from governments, economic 
and financial institutions, and the broader climate community must make mutually reinforcing 
contributions, because effective solutions require the resources, perspectives, and expertise of all 
sides—to ultimately decide on shared goals and effective means of achievement.
8. When countries integrate commitments from Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and Long-
term Strategies (LTSs) into core economic/development and sectoral planning, policy, and financing 
(including through country platforms), NDBs should have a role to (1) help identify enabling, policy and 
institutional reforms, and (2) develop investible pipelines. MDBs can support this role through capacity 
building if needed. Specifically, to support the achievement of NDC and LTS objectives, NDBs need to 
take responsibility for building a more substantive pipeline of commercially attractive climate and just 
transition projects.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE FINANCE TO MEET CLIMATE INVESTMENT 
GAPS
KEY FINDINGS
PDBs have the tools to massively accelerate private capital flows to close current climate finance 
shortfalls, particularly in EMDEs. 
• Guarantees can play a key role in mobilizing private capital for the climate transition, particularly in 
EMDEs. Despite their potential to leverage significantly more investment for climate projects than 
other financial instruments, guarantees remain underutilized due to structural barriers such as complex 
application processes, limited technical assistance, high costs, misaligned timelines, and insufficient 
stakeholder collaboration (CPI 2024).
• MDBs can mitigate risks both at the portfolio level by shifting it to private investors and at the project 
level by sharing it with private investors. At the project level, MDBs’ policies and financial tools can help 
manage political and regulatory risks. These measures can significantly enhance the risk-return profile of 
climate projects and bring additional private capital and expertise (WRI 2023).
RECOMMENDATIONS
For growing investment-ready project pipelines:
1. MDBs should increasingly consider financial de-risking mechanisms at the portfolio level. They should 
help transform entire sectors by addressing risks across projects within a sector, rather than focusing 
solely on individual assets (a “wholesale” vs. “retail” approach). Leveraging local knowledge, networks, 
and investors is key to this approach.
2. MDBs, bilateral DFIs, and regional PDBs should lead efforts to increase data accessibility and 
transparency, such as the Global Emerging Markets (GEMs) Risk Database consortium, by broadening 
access to more granular credit and default probability data. This will streamline project and program 
design, assessment, and decision-making processes.
8
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
3. PDB guarantors should simplify eligibility and reporting requirements across similarly structured 
guarantee products. They should also establish and/or expand technical assistance facilities to support 
local actors developing bankable climate projects. PDBs should also reduce the cost of obtaining and 
implementing guarantees: In the short term this could include cost-sharing, fee-subsidies, or donor-
funded facilities. It will also be important to structure guarantees to align with extended project lifespans 
and to increase collaboration between private and public sectors.
BUILDING PLATFORMS FOR JUST TRANSITION AND 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
KEY FINDINGS
As country platforms emerge into actionable frameworks, PDBs have a large role to play in both 
establishing guidance and leading implementation.
• The next generation of country platforms (CPs) represent a critical opportunity for a revamped model 
for delivering climate-positive growth and development outcomes at the country level. To fulfil their 
potential, CPs must be both context-specific and anchored in a set of core principles. If designed 
well, they can enhance country-level collaboration across the full range of national and international 
development and climate actors, improve access to all forms of finance, and ultimately serve as a key 
implementation mechanism for national planning (E3G 2024).
• PDBs play a vital role in supporting countries in crafting Paris-aligned, long-term, low-emission 
development strategies that enable fossil fuel phase-out (NewClimate Institute & I4CE 2024).).
• For example, South Africa’s Presidential Climate Commission initiated its country platform development 
process with an emphasis on collaboration between numerous stakeholders—both within and outside 
the government (WRI 2022). The resulting Just Transition Framework outlines a clear pathway for 
mobilizing finance for a national-scale just transition, leveraging multiple sources of support, which 
include both domestic and donor PDBs (WRI 2024).
RECOMMENDATIONS
For supporting platform development and implementation:
1. PDBs should assist countries in defining Paris-aligned long-term low-emissions development strategies 
and national energy plans and support governments in building capacity to plan and implement early 
retirement initiatives. They can also facilitate knowledge-sharing platforms that enable stakeholders, 
including country governments and PDBs, to exchange best practices for implementing a just transition 
strategy.
2. NDBs should participate in both the upstream and downstream structuring of country platforms (CPs) 
to support national ownership and policy coherence. These institutions bring significant value-add such 
as local knowledge, and this helps to align international goals with national investment priorities, project 
origination, local currency financing, and domestic private capital mobilization.    
3. Both MDBs and bilateral PDBs should aim to support country-level climate ambition through financial, 
technical, and policy support. In the context of CPs, they should collaborate and utilize their convening 
9
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
power to provide financial resources, deploy innovative mechanisms that can unlock private investment, 
and serve as a knowledge hub to facilitate coherence and exchange of lessons learned across the PDB 
ecosystem. While existing instruments and policies can help to increase both public and private finance 
for climate action, identifying and leveraging the right tools remains a challenge. The Paying for Paris 
Resource Hub bridges this gap with information and real-world testimonials on the strategies available 
to countries to achieve their climate finance goals.
FINANCING THE ENERGY TRANSITION
KEY FINDINGS
Facilitation of the energy transition intersects with PDBs’ broader mandate of delivering finance for 
sustainable development.
• PDBs support key energy sector stakeholders in overcoming transition barriers. However, in developing 
financing vehicles for transition they must carefully navigate the associated risks, which could delay 
coal phase-out or create perverse incentives that undermine progress toward a low-emission future 
(NewClimate Institute & I4CE 2024).
In some contexts, this means taking an active role in managing the private and social costs of shifting to 
low-carbon energy sources.
• In coal-dependent, resource-strapped nations, retiring fossil fuels without harming communities or 
economies is not just a complex social and political challenge; it is also a financial one. These countries 
need more financing and alternative energy solutions, while at the same time, many have young coal 
fleets and new plants still under development. These plants are expected to operate for decades and risk 
becoming “stranded assets” if they retire early  (WRI, 2023).
Finally, PDBs can catalyze adoption of energy transition technologies via targeted financing programs 
and market building.
• MDBs and other PDBs can play a key role in de-risking and financing emerging energy transition 
technologies, such as green hydrogen. The existing MDB climate finance and strategy toolkit can be 
adapted to not only support the development of a global green hydrogen market, but also to capture 
sustainable development benefits for producers in the Global South (NewClimate Institute 2024).
• Many countries in South/Southeast Asia lack the right ingredients to attract clean energy investment: 
A supportive and predictable policy environment, enabling financial systems, and modern grid 
infrastructure that can handle renewables. MDBs can help overcome these barriers to help unlock more 
finance and catalyze the region’s clean energy transition (WRI 2024).
• The Solar Finance Roadmap provides recommendations for mobilizing a massive equitable scale-up 
of investment in solar energy by 2030, including specific analysis of the role PDBs play in supporting 
market development. The solution pathways and recommendations in the paper focus on tackling policy 
and market barriers in all solar market segments, reducing investment risk in developing and emerging 
economies, and spurring a new level of international collaboration to overcome global investment 
challenges at scale (WRI 2022).
• Showcasing innovative PDB support for energy transition, WRI and the EBRD have co-developed 
a method to quantify physical climate risks for power generation projects at the portfolio level, 
10
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
the approach is designed to be flexible enough to work with portfolios with different levels of data 
availability, leverage the latest science in climate and hydrology, and use machine-learning techniques 
(WRI 2021).
RECOMMENDATIONS
For strengthening linkages between the energy transition and PDB policy mandates:
1. PDBs should balance their dual mandates of promoting the clean energy transition and championing 
sustainable development in partner countries. They must lead by example through responsible 
lending practices that go beyond the “do no harm” principle, emphasizing value creation and fostering 
lasting development outcomes. Specific actions include: (1) Supporting projects to modernize grids 
and transmission infrastructure; (2) Reducing investment risks to attract more private finance; (3) 
Working with governments to enable country-level energy transitions; and (4) Improving international 
coordination to bolster clean energy investments. 
For facilitating equitable fossil fuel phase out:
2. It is crucial that PDBs establish high standards and safeguards to support utilities and independent 
power producers in retiring coal plants early, minimizing the risk of creating perverse incentives. Their 
support should focus on transforming utility business models to attract private financing for renewable 
energy projects. 
3. Financing mechanisms should only be used to buy out coal plants owned by independent power 
producers in jurisdictions where governments have formally committed to phasing out coal, ensuring 
alignment with long-term decarbonization goals. It is important for PDBs to exercise caution in financing 
solutions like co-firing, and retrofitting, which do not result in complete emission reductions and shift the 
focus away from early retirement. They should also carefully approach transition (carbon) credits due to 
current double counting risks and environmental integrity issues.
4. Case studies on coal retirement and JET-Ps provide evidence that coal-dependent countries need 
financial assistance. Younger coal fleets pose unique challenges, however, and coal plant ownership 
must be considered in financing agreements while keeping coal retirement plans on track to support 
Just Energy Transition. To be successful, therefore, coal retirement plans must be tailored to national 
contexts, keeping not only political stakeholders in mind but financial ones, too.
For accelerating investment in renewable energy:
5. The Solar Finance Roadmap identifies both near-term actions and broader collaborative efforts to 
overcome barriers to scaling solar. To address these barriers, governments can act immediately in 
partnership with commercial and national banks and DFIs to adopt enabling policies and regulations 
that are conducive to replicating and scaling solar investment. In parallel, DFIs can lead on standardizing 
and scaling up the provision of blended finance, concessional credit lines, and other risk mitigation 
instruments to pave the way for private investment.
11
2025 Policy Bulletin: Climate Finance for Development
OTHER EMERGING THEMES
KEY FINDINGS
PDBs have an opportunity to incubate emerging mechanisms for climate investment, such as carbon 
markets and nature finance.
• Carbon markets have the potential to help mobilize finance for EMDEs, and PDBs can play a crucial 
role in supporting development of these markets domestically. However, a lack of national capacity and 
comprehensive development and climate strategies, limited PDB resources and staff time, and demand- 
and supply-side restrictions limit the market implementation. PDBs of all shapes and sizes can help 
bridge these gaps and facilitate more efficient and impactful markets (CPI forthcoming 2025).
• PDBs can play a pivotal role in increasing the attractiveness of debt-for-climate swaps by providing credit 
enhancements like guarantees, insurance, and local currency solutions, while also addressing gaps in 
sovereign and catastrophic risk coverage. They can also support bilateral swaps and subnational debt 
mechanisms, mobilizing private capital and reducing foreign exchange risks (CPI forthcoming 2025).
RECOMMENDATIONS
For developing innovative financial instruments:
1. PDBs can support governments in establishing domestic carbon markets by providing strategic 
and technical assistance, working with potential suppliers of credits (projects that reduce or avoid 
emissions), and supporting regulators to improve credit integrity. They can help to reduce risk by 
piloting innovative (financial) projects that focus on de-risking and leveraging carbon revenues. 
PDBs can also coordinate between themselves, including working on policy proposals and innovative 
projects, convening relevant stakeholders, and sharing best practices from previous projects and market 
implementations. 
2. PDBs should prioritize aligning financial products with nature conservation goals, standardizing 
key performance indicators, and building government capacity through technical, legal, and project 
management expertise to ensure successful negotiation and implementation of debt-for-climate swaps 
if these are suitable for the country.
Copyright © 2025 Climate Policy Initiative climatepolicyinitiative.org. All rights reserved. CPI welcomes the use of its material for noncommercial 
purposes, such as policy discussions or educational activities, under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC 
BY-NC-SA 4.0) License. For commercial use, please contact adminsf@cpiglobal.org.