ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Social Indicators Research (2026) 183:28
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-026-03850-8
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through 
Autoencoders: Evidence from Florence’s Suburban Areas
Giulio Grossi1
 · Emilia Rocco1
Received: 7 July 2025 / Accepted: 10 April 2026 / Published online: 18 June 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
The interest in summarizing complex and multidimensional phenomena often related to 
one or more specific sectors (social, economic, environmental, political, etc.) to make 
them easily understandable even to non-experts is far from waning. A widely adopted ap­
proach for this purpose is the use of composite indices, statistical measures that aggregate 
multiple indicators into a single comprehensive measure. In this paper, we present a novel 
methodology called AutoSynth, designed to condense potentially extensive datasets into a 
single synthetic index or a hierarchy of such indices. AutoSynth leverages an Autoencoder, 
a neural network technique, to represent a matrix of features in a lower-dimensional space. 
Although this approach is not limited to the creation of a particular composite index and 
can be applied broadly across various sectors, the motivation behind this work arises 
from a real-world need. Specifically, we aim to assess the vulnerability of the Italian city 
of Florence at the suburban level across three dimensions: economic, demographic, and 
social. To demonstrate the methodology’s effectiveness, it is also applied to estimate a 
vulnerability index using a rich, publicly available dataset on U.S. counties and validated 
through a simulation study.
Keywords  Composite indices · Multidimensional phenomena · Neural networks · 
Nonlinear data reduction · Socioeconomic vulnerability · Suburban-scale monitoring
1  Introduction
A “synthetic index", sometimes also referred to as “composite", is typically defined in a 
general sense as a statistical measure that combines multiple variables, often called indi­
cators or elementary (or individual) indices, into a single, unified measure. This general 
definition highlights that constructing a composite index involves a series of methodologi­
	
 Giulio Grossi
giulio.grossi@unifi.it
Emilia Rocco
emilia.rocco@unifi.it
1	
Department of Statistics, Computer Science and Applications “G. Parenti”, University of 
Florence, Viale Morgagni 59, 50134 Florence, Italy


1 3
28 
Page 2 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
cal decisions beyond just the aggregation rule. Such choices should be grounded in a clear 
conceptualisation of the phenomenon to be measured and followed by an assessment of the 
index’s coherence and robustness relative to alternative measures of the same construct, 
for instance, through comparisons of units’ rankings or other performance metrics, includ­
ing the stress measure defined in a subsequent section. Consequently, the construction of 
composite indices remains a subject of considerable interest and ongoing debate in statistics 
and data analysis. Their widespread use reflects their capacity to summarise complex, mul­
tidimensional, and non-directly observable phenomena, while also underscoring the signifi­
cant methodological challenges they entail. By aggregating diverse indicators into a single 
measure, they provide policymakers and the public with an effective tool for understanding 
and monitoring complex, multidimensional phenomena, as well as for evaluating the effects 
of policy decisions and interventions within such contexts. Moreover, they enable transpar­
ent ranking of the units to which they refer, such as the geographical areas or other relevant 
groups of individuals or entities, facilitating comparisons across different spatial and tempo­
ral contexts as well as across additional explicitly defined settings. For these reasons, their 
use spans various fields, ranging from social and economic to environmental and political 
contexts. They have also been widely adopted by global institutions (e.g. the OECD, World 
Bank, EU, etc.). The Human Development Index (HDI), the Environmental Performance 
Index (EPI), the Better Life Index (BLI), the Measure of Economic Well-being (MEW), 
the Global Competitiveness Index (GCI), the Gender Inequality Index(GII), the European 
Quality of Government Index(EQGI) are only a few examples of composite indices each 
tailored to a specific application field. Many other examples are in Bandura (2011), which 
identifies over 400 official composite indices that rank or assess a country according to some 
economic, political, social, or environmental measures.
With the growth in availability of data at detailed territorial levels, the computation of 
composite indices has progressively extended beyond national and regional boundaries. This 
expansion includes smaller areas, such as municipalities and even sub-municipal zones.
Regardless of the specific synthetic index, its scope, or the territorial level at which it 
is applied, the construction of such an index is based on a data-reduction technique. There 
are various examples of data-reduction techniques within the realm of synthetic indices, 
see Mishra (2007); Krishnan (2010); Li et al. (2012); Kotzee and Reyers (2016) among 
others. Most approaches are based on the use of more or less intricate averages, sometimes 
weighted and/or even penalized. The goal of this contribution is to explore the application of 
autoencoders as a means of dimensionality reduction for datasets comprised of elementary 
indices. The fundamental aim is to distill essential features from a collection of observations 
into a singular composite index. The idea of a data-driven composite index is not a novelty. 
The use of such statistical models can be seen as a nonlinear extension of the construction 
methods for synthetic indices based on the principal component analysis (PCA). Kramer 
(1991) defines the autoencoders as a non-linear version of the PCA. Hence, through the use 
of autoencoders, our goal is to create a data-driven synthetic index, the “AutoSynth Index" 
that, by capturing nonlinear relationships within the data, provides a more accurate repre­
sentation of the elementary indicators set.
Although the suggested modus operandi is not tied to the construction of a specific com­
posite index and can be employed in a general manner for constructing a synthetic index in 
any sector, this work presents a specific case study. It focuses on defining a socio-economic 
synthetic index to quantify and qualify the multifaceted vulnerabilities embedded within the 


1 3
Page 3 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
suburban areas of an Italian municipality, specifically Florence. This index, amalgamating 
an array of socio-economic and demographic indicators, aims to unveil underlying patterns, 
identify potential risk factors, and shed light on vulnerability thresholds that may undermine 
the sustainable development and well-being of suburban communities. It seeks to provide 
valuable insights for informed policies and interventions to enhance the resilience and pros­
perity of Florence’s suburban areas.
To demonstrate the AutoSynth Index’s functionality, it was also applied to estimate a 
vulnerability index for U.S. counties, using the rich dataset provided by CDC (2019). Addi­
tionally, a simulation study was conducted to explore its ability to reproduce the original 
dimensions within a single feature space across different contexts.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of 
the preliminaries on the construction of synthetic indices; Section 3 details the proposed 
methodology; Section 4 presents the motivating case study; Section 5 demonstrates the 
application of the methodology to estimate a vulnerability index using a large dataset on 
U.S. counties, while Section 6 explores its performance across various simulated scenarios; 
finally, Section 7 provides the concluding discussion.
2  A Brief Overview of the Key Steps in Constructing a Composite Index
Synthetic indices are derived from the aggregation of a set of indicators, each representing 
a specific dimension of the phenomenon of interest. The undoubted advantage of comput­
ing such indices, which stems from managing the complexity and multidimensionality of a 
phenomenon (Mazziotta and Pareto, 2020), contrasts with what is considered the main limi­
tation of their use. This limitation is the simplification, sometimes deemed excessive, of the 
object of study, which is argued to inevitably lead to a significant loss of information. Fur­
thermore, while the benefits of using synthetic indices are numerous, so too are the potential 
errors if the basic and general guidelines that ensure the quality, accuracy, and reliability of 
the results are ignored. For example, omitting an essential indicator can significantly impact 
the comprehensive evaluation of the phenomenon of interest. Additionally, the choice of 
aggregation method is crucial. These are the main considerations that have led some schol­
ars to prefer the dashboards as an alternative analysis method for measuring complex reali­
ties. Unlike a synthetic index, a dashboard does not condense the object of study into a 
single dimension, allowing for the identification of various relevant dimensions. However, 
it is also clear that this tool lacks the immediate communicative and interpretive capacities 
that make it easily accessible to users. As noted by UNECE (2019), composite indicators 
and dashboards are complementary tools, and the choice between them ultimately depends 
on the user’s needs. One way to address the excessive synthesis of a synthetic index and the 
insufficient synthesis of a dashboard is by using them together. For example, according to 
Sachs et al. (2023) the SDG Index assesses each country’s overall performance on the 17 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), while the dashboard aids in identifying priorities 
for further actions and indicates whether countries are on track or off track to achieve the 
goals and targets by 2030. An in-depth comparison between the two analysis methods, as 
well as an exhaustive review of the literature on synthetic indices, will not fall within the 
scope of this work. However, before describing our approach to constructing a composite 
index, it is important to briefly outline the main steps to be followed and the key method­


1 3
28 
Page 4 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
ological choices to be considered in its development, without claiming to be exhaustive. 
These steps are described in detail by the OECD (2008) and UNECE (2019), among others.
According to OECD (2008), it is first necessary to define the theoretical framework. “A 
theoretical framework should be developed to provide the basis for the selection and combi­
nation of single indices into a meaningful composite index under a fitness-for-purpose prin­
ciple." This process should clearly define the phenomenon of interest and its components, 
while meaningfully involving experts and stakeholders to ensure the relevance and usefulness 
of the composite index. A fundamental choice concerns the construct’s measurement model: 
whether it should be specified as reflective or formative (Diamantopoulos, 2001; Fleuren et 
al., 2018). In a formative specification, the indicators cause and define the latent variable, 
each capturing a distinct facet of the construct; in a reflective specification, the latent construct 
gives rise to correlated indicators as manifestations of the same underlying phenomenon. The 
formative perspective is the most commonly adopted approach in the analysis of socio-eco­
nomic phenomena and vulnerability (UNECE, 2019), where it is typically the socio-economic 
determinants — income, demography, social cohesion — that drive the construct rather than 
the other way around. This is accordingly the perspective adopted in the present work.
The second step is data selection. The variables or elementary indices should be selected 
on the basis of their analytical robustness, measurability, coverage for the territorial areas 
of interest, relevance for the phenomenon to be measured and the relationship between 
them. Data containing large measurement errors or numerous missing values can lead to 
questionable results. Therefore, the selection of data must be based on a thorough analysis 
of the data itself. Additionally, various methods for imputing missing data and for handling 
extreme values should be considered. Moreover, in addition to carrying out preliminary 
univariate analysis of the data, it is also necessary to perform a preliminary multivariate 
analysis to examine the overall structure of the data. This includes checking for correla­
tions and compensability among elementary indices, as well as identifying any redundancy 
in the information. Compensability refers to the fact that a unit could compensate for the 
loss in one dimension with a gain in another (Munda and Nardo, 2009; OECD, 2008). All 
these preliminary data investigations are useful for providing insights that guide subsequent 
methodological choices concerning weighting and aggregation methods. Normalisation is 
also usually required before aggregating data, as the indicators in a dataset often have dif­
ferent measurement units. Several normalization methods exist (Freudenberg, 2003; Jacobs 
et al., 2004), among which the two most well-known are standardization (or z-scores trans­
formation) and Min-Max normalization. Standardisation converts indicators to a common 
scale by setting the mean at zero and the standard deviation at one. The Min-Max method 
normalises indicators to a uniform range of [0, 1] by subtracting the minimum value and 
dividing by the range of the indicator values.
The selection of weights and the aggregation rule are interrelated. Weights can gener­
ally be considered as coefficients that are attached to individual indices, indicating their 
relative importance to each other. Their effect on the resulting synthetic index depends on 
the adopted aggregation method. Most composite indicators rely on equal weighting or the 
absence of weighting. As outlined in OECD (2008) and Greco et al. (2019) the two options 
differ because if the indexes are grouped into a higher order category (e.g., a dimension) and 
the weights are distributed equally among these dimensions, it does not necessarily imply 
that the individual indexes within each dimension will receive equal weights. Several other 
weighting techniques exist. Some are derived from statistical models, such as principal 


1 3
Page 5 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
component analysis or factor analysis, only to mention a few possible methods. Weights 
may also be chosen to reflect the statistical quality of the data; for example, lower weighting 
could be assigned to individual indexes with multiple cases of treated missing data. Some­
times the weighting system is subjectively chosen by the developer of the specific synthetic 
index. To make this choice less subjective, it may involve one or several stakeholders. For a 
more detailed discussion of the weighting systems, we refer to Greco et al. (2019)
The most commonly employed aggregation methods involve various combinations of 
variables–linear, geometric, or multi-objective–ranging from the simple arithmetic mean 
to more sophisticated formulas that may incorporate weighted and penalised components. 
Among these methodologies, the Adjusted Mazziotta–Pareto Index (AMPI) stands out as 
a non-compensatory composite index designed to measure multidimensional phenomena 
where indicators are not fully substitutable. Originally developed to assess well-being, 
AMPI remains a benchmark for evaluating sustainable and equitable well-being (BES) in 
Italy. Due to its application and inherent properties, it is considered in this work as a poten­
tial alternative for comparison with the AutoSynth index proposed herein, which is based 
on a different aggregation approach utilising a data reduction technique. Such techniques, 
notably PCA, are employed to construct synthetic indices by reducing the dimensionality of 
the data while preserving as much variability as possible. For various applications of data 
reduction techniques in the realm of synthetic indices, refer to studies by Mishra (2007); 
Krishnan (2010); Li et al. (2012); Kotzee and Reyers (2016), among others.
2.1  Mazziotta-Pareto Index
In this section, we aim to provide a brief description of the AMPI construction process, refer­
ring to Mazziotta and Pareto (2018) for further details. For the construction of the AMPI 
index, the first step involves normalising the variables under study. This process transforms 
the non scaled data matrix, i n line-eq-IEq1 (where i n li n e - e q-IEq2 indexes the units and i n li n e - e q-IEq3 
the elementary indices), into a scaled matrix i n line-eq-IEq4 using the following formula:
	
dis p
l
ay- e q-Equ1

(1)
In this equation, inline-eq-IEq5 and inline-eq-IEq6 represent the minimum and maximum values of 
the variable inline-eq-IEq7, serving as the "goalposts" for normalisation. This transformation rescales 
the original data to a range between 70 and 130, centering the normalized indicators around 
100. The choice of these values (60 and 70) is arbitrary but does not affect the ranking of 
the units and it is already established in the literature by convention. The values inline-eq-IEq8 
and inline-eq-IEq9 are referred to as “goalposts," representing the minimum and maximum refer­
ence values. These goalposts can be theoretical (e.g., the unemployment rate cannot exceed 
inline-eq-IEq10 or fall below inline-eq-IEq11) or derived from observed data (e.g., the maximum unemployment 
rate observed in the sample was inline-eq-IEq12). To incorporate variables that have an “opposite" 
polarity relative to the phenomenon of interest, the variable is first normalized as previously 
described, and then its complement to 200 is calculated. The third step in constructing the 
index involves aggregating the normalised variables into a composite indicator as follows:
	
displ
a y -e q -Equ2
(2)


1 3
28 
Page 6 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
where inline-eq-IEq13 is the arithmetic mean of the elementary indicators, inline-eq-IEq14 is the standard deviation for 
unit i and inline-eq-IEq15 is the coefficient of variation for unit i .
The choice of the operator’s sign in Eq. 2 depends on the nature of the phenomenon 
being represented. For positive phenomena, such as economic development, the subtraction 
operator is used. Conversely, for negative phenomena, like social vulnerability, the addition 
operator is appropriate. This approach penalizes units exhibiting high variability among 
indicators, ensuring that the index reflects a balanced performance across all considered 
dimensions.
3  Constructing Synthetic Indicators using Autoencoders
Our approach aims to develop synthetic indices by employing autoencoders to reduce the 
dimensionality of datasets comprising numerous elementary indices. According to Bank et 
al. (2023), “an autoencoder is a type of algorithm with the primary purpose of learning an 
informative representation of the data that can be used for different applications by learning 
to reconstruct a set of input observations well enough".
While various data reduction techniques have been applied in the realm of synthetic indi­
ces, such as those by Mishra (2007); Krishnan (2010); Li et al. (2012); Kotzee and Reyers 
(2016)–these are typically linear methods. Unlike linear techniques like PCA, autoencoders 
can capture complex, non-linear relationships within the data, allowing for more nuanced 
feature extraction. Autoencoders, firstly proposed by Rumelhart et al. (1986), serve as a 
nonlinear alternative to PCA, as defined by Kramer (1991).
It is worth noting that autoencoders are not the only nonlinear extension of PCA available 
in the literature. A well-established family of methods originates from the optimal scal­
ing framework (De Leeuw, 2009; Gifi, 1990). Categorical Principal Component Analysis 
(CATPCA, also known as PRINCALS) extends classical PCA by simultaneously estimat­
ing nonlinear transformations of individual variables and the principal component solu­
tion, using an Alternating Least Squares algorithm (Linting and van der Kooij, 2012). 
Since the transformations are optimised jointly with respect to the PCA criterion, CATPCA 
can effectively capture nonlinear relationships between variables — but only insofar as 
these can be linearised through univariate transformations. The resulting model is addi­
tive: the latent dimension is a linear combination of nonlinearly transformed variables, i.e. 
i n l
i ne-eq-IEq16, which precludes the representation of interaction effects across indica­
tors. CATPCA is particularly suited to mixed-scale data (nominal, ordinal, numerical), a 
setting common in survey-based index construction (Comim and Amaral, 2013; Saukani 
and Ismail, 2019). A further generalisation is OVERALS (van der Burg et al., 1988), which 
partitions variables into predefined sets and maximises homogeneity across them — a struc­
ture conceptually akin to the sequential aggregation described in Section 3.3.
Autoencoders differ in that nonlinearity is embedded directly in the reduction model: the 
encoder maps the entire input vector through compositions of activation functions across 
hidden layers, yielding a latent representation i n line- e q - I Eq17 that can capture arbi­
trary nonlinear interactions among indicators, not only additive effects of individual trans­
formations. In this sense, autoencoders generalise the optimal scaling approach rather than 
merely offering an alternative to it.


1 3
Page 7 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
Autoencoders are neural network architectures designed to learn efficient representations 
of data by reconstructing the original input matrix inline-eq-IEq18, while constraining the encoding to 
a lower-dimensional subspace. The input matrix inline-eq-IEq19 has dimensions i n line-eq-IEq20, where N rep­
resents the number of observations and p denotes the number of features (or elementary 
indicators) in the dataset. The objective is to extract a compressed representation that retains 
the most relevant information. The target vector inline-eq-IEq21 , a i n line-eq-IEq22 vector, represents the essential 
output or label associated with the observations. Autoencoders are particularly useful for 
identifying and learning the most significant features from high-dimensional data, making 
them powerful tools for dimensionality reduction and unsupervised learning in the context 
of neural networks. An autoencoder comprises two primary components: an encoder and a 
decoder. The encoder function inline-eq-IEq23 compresses the input data inline-eq-IEq24 into the lower-dimensional 
latent representation inline-eq-IEq25 , such that in l ine-eq-IEq26, capturing the most salient features. Subse­
quently, the decoder function inline-eq-IEq27 endeavours to reconstruct the original input from this com­
pressed form, yielding i
n l in e- eq-IEq28. Consequently, the overall transformation is represented 
as i
n l ine-eq-IEq29.
	
display-
eq - Equ3

(3)
where W is a set of activation weights, b is a bias vector and inline-eq-IEq30 is a proper activation func­
tion. This process enables the model to learn efficient codings of the data in an unsupervised 
manner, making autoencoders particularly suitable for dimensionality reduction tasks. For a 
more detailed description, refer to LeCun et al. (2015). We provide additional explanations 
for our modelling choices in Section 3.1.
Central to the autoencoder architecture is the optimisation of a specific objective func­
tion. This function aims to minimise the discrepancy between the original input matrix inline-eq-IEq31 
and the reconstructed output i
nline-eq-IEq32. The distance metric inli n
e-eq-IEq33 quantifies this discrepancy. 
The optimisation target is formally articulated as:
	
displa
y-e
q- E qu4

(4)
See Fig. 1 for a graphical representation of the autoencoder architecture.
The choice of the metric distance inli n
e-eq-IEq34 can affect the results and thus its choice 
should be handled with care. In our work, we refer to the term distance as Euclidean dis­
tance, which is a baseline choice. Other distance measures are possible, think for instance to 
fuzzy distance measures, but we leave the discussion of composite index based on different 
metrics to future work. Additionally, it is necessary to choose a proper activation function 
for the nodes of the neural network. To grasp the nonlinearities that could be present in the 
dataset, we opt for a Rectified Linear (ReLu) activation function throughout this work.
	
display- e q-Equ8
As underlined by Michelucci (2022), ReLu function is particularly suitable when the values 
in the dataset inline-eq-IEq35 are in the very majority positive, this is usually the case of indicators in 
social research, that can be normalized but usually in a positive range, see for instance the 


1 3
28 
Page 8 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
normalization proposed by Mazziotta and Pareto (2018), that spans between 70 and 130. 
We tested other nonlinear options (logistic activation, hyperbolic tangent), but we find the 
most promising results with ReLu. For an in-depth discussion on the choice of activation 
functions in autoencoders, see also Klopries (2023).
Five additional considerations regarding the use of autoencoders for constructing syn­
thetic indices include: the potential incorporation of input weights; the interpretation of 
Indicator relevance; the hierarchical organization of more synthetic indices; the issue of the 
index’s polarity not definable a priori and finally, defining a criterion to assess AutoSynth’s 
performance relative to other aggregation methods
3.1  Input Weights
Researchers might occasionally prefer to define a set of initial weights proactively, rather 
than allowing the autoencoder to determine weights from the data. This approach is par­
ticularly relevant when aiming to accurately depict phenomena where specific elementary 
indices require distinct weighting relative to others. Such scenarios align with the principles 
of synthetic index construction utilizing weighted averages, where expert knowledge influ­
ences the initial weight assignment. Notice that in Eq. 3, a set of weights is present. The 
vector W represents the coefficients applied to the consecutive combination of the set of 
elementary indices inline-eq-IEq36 through the layers. In practice, we can emphasize the importance 
of some elementary indices in the reconstruction of the output by specifying a set of input 
weights that weigh in an asymmetric way the indicators used in the autoencoder. This speci­
fication is very important when the researcher has the availability of prior information about 
the relative importance of the indicators used to construct the synthetic index. In particular, 
this allows us to derive an informed representation of the latent phenomena, which is dif­
ferent from the representation that we could get if we have no prior information about the 
importance of elementary indices. On the other hand, a specification of the set of weights 
that is too unbalanced, or narrow, associated with an autoencoder architecture not flex­
ible enough, could lead towards representations of the latent phenomena that are biased or 
imprecise. It is worth noticing that the use of input weights resembles the use of weights in 
the construction of synthetic indices with the common usage methods, in which the expert 
Fig. 1  Basic scheme of autoencoders. In this application, inputs will be indicators of socio-economic 
development, while the code will be the synthetic indicator
 


1 3
Page 9 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
has control (and responsibility) over the set of weights and, intrinsically, over the output 
of the analysis. From this perspective, this procedure within the Autosynth represents an 
advancement, as we incorporate the expert knowledge with the nonlinear data compression 
through the autoencoder. In this work, we remain agnostic with respect to the input weights, 
setting all of them equal to one, and with respect to the bias vector b, setting it equal to zero. 
However, different specifications are possible, but it is not our primary focus to treat them 
here, as their specification are case specific.
3.2  Post-Estimation Indicators Relevance
On a different perspective, it is possible to extract the posterior importance of an elementary 
index, namely, how much the indicator is affecting the synthetic index. Here, we propose 
to estimate these Indicator relevance by estimating the reconstruction error associated with 
each indicator employed. By examining these errors, we assess each indicator’s relative 
weight and potential disproportionate influence due to correlation structures, refining the 
indicator set for the synthetic index construction. The process of calculating the reconstruc­
tion error is as follows:
	
di s p
l
a
y
-eq
-Equ 5

(5)
Where i
nline-eq-IEq37 is the indicator matrix reconstructed through the encoder and decoder function, 
as in Eq. 3.
3.3  Sequential Autoencoders
The utilisation of synthetic indices is particularly vital for aggregating elementary indi­
ces across various domains. In such cases, a bifurcated approach to aggregation is highly 
effective. Initially, variables within identical domains are merged–for example, combin­
ing all indicators related to economic vulnerability into a single economic vulnerability 
index. Following this, the second phase involves the consolidation of vulnerability indi­
ces from distinct domains. This idea is equally applicable to the Autosynth tool, where 
we could institute a hierarchical aggregation process. Initially, variables within the same 
domain are aggregated, and subsequently, variables across different domains are merged. 
This hierarchical structure facilitates the derivation of intermediate-level indices, allowing 
for an in-depth analysis not just at the synthetic index level, which represents the overall 
issue, but also within more separate domains. Moreover, it’s crucial to acknowledge that 
computational costs can escalate with a significant volume of observations, particularly 
when numerous elementary indices are involved. Therefore, segmenting the aggregation 
process into two distinct phases not only offers methodological benefits but also enhances 
calculus’s efficiency. This hierarchical aggregation strategy bears a structural resemblance 
to the set-based approach of OVERALS (van der Burg et al., 1988), where variables are 
likewise grouped into substantive domains and aggregated in stages. The key difference is 


1 3
28 
Page 10 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
that OVERALS is constrained to maximise linear canonical correlations between sets of 
transformed variables, whereas sequential autoencoders can capture nonlinear cross-domain 
interactions through the composition of encoding functions.
3.4  Polarity
Since autoencoders project the encoded representation of the data matrix inline-eq-IEq38 into a latent 
subspace, the resulting values may differ in scale and even in ordering compared to the 
original data. As a consequence, the direction of the resulting index is not necessarily pre­
served. This situation can compromise the interpretability of the index, as its polarity is not 
defined a priori (Mazziotta and Pareto, 2013), namely whether higher values represent a 
desirable or undesirable phenomenon. Therefore, the results obtained through aggregation 
with Autosynth, similarly to those from PCA) are not directly interpretable. To address 
this issue, the researcher can rely on domain expertise to assess whether the polarity of the 
latent dimension is consistent with expectations or alternatively, use an external synthetic 
index as a reference for interpretation. In this work, we adopt the synthetic index derived 
from the AMPI methodology as a compass: if the unit with the highest AMPI score does 
not fall within the first quartile of the Autosynth-based index, we invert the polarity of the 
Autosynth index.
3.5  Measuring Autosynth Performances
To evaluate Autosynth’s performance, we assess two criteria: (i) the consistency of its results 
with those obtained from alternative indices–particularly in terms of unit rankings–and (ii) a 
stress measure, which quantifies how well the low-dimensional representation preserves the 
original distances between observations in the original dimension, and consequently how 
accurately it reflects the relationships among units.
For the first evaluation criterion, we selected two benchmark indices: the AMPI and a 
PCA-based index. AMPI is a non-compensatory synthetic measure constructed by aggregat­
ing elementary indicators and is widely used in Italy to summarise multivariate phenomena 
similar to our motivating case study. The PCA-based index was chosen because, like Auto­
Synth, it reduces data dimensionality while retaining maximal variance, thus serving as the 
linear counterpart to our proposed method.
Concerning the second criterion, we employ the two-dimensional stress measures intro­
duced by Kruskal (1964), as represented in Eq. 6.
	
d i
s
p
l
a
y-
eq-Equ6

(6)
Here, inline-eq-IEq39 represents the Euclidean distances between units i and j in the matrix of elemen­
tary indicators inline-eq-IEq40 as inl i
ne-
eq
-IEq4
1
, while inline-eq-IEq42 denotes the Euclidean distances 
between the same units in the synthetic index inline-eq-IEq43 as i
nli n
e
-eq- I Eq44 . By construction, the 
stress measure will lie between 0 and 1, and lower values for the index represent a better 
representation of the original outcome.


1 3
Page 11 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
4  Assessing Vulnerability in Florence
In this section, we present the case study that inspired our research: the development of a 
Socio-Economic and Demographic vulnerability Index (SEDI) specifically designed for the 
Florentine suburbs.
Cities across the globe are undergoing rapid transformations driven by urbanization 
and societal shifts. These dynamics create a complex interplay between social, economic, 
and demographic factors, posing significant challenges for researchers, policymakers, and 
urban planners. The historic city of Florence, Italy, provides a compelling case study for 
examining these global trends. Despite its world-renowned cultural heritage, Florence is not 
immune to the challenges of urban evolution. The city’s evolving social fabric has led to 
significant disparities in residents’ living conditions, particularly within its suburban areas, 
raising the need for careful analysis and strategic solutions to ensure the well-being of all 
Florentine residents. A powerful approach to shed light on these complexities lies in the con­
struction and evaluation of a Socio-Economic and Demographic vulnerability Index (SEDI) 
at the suburban level. This study proposes the development of such an index specifically 
tailored to the Florentine suburbs. The SEDI will integrate a range of socio-economic and 
demographic indicators to quantify and qualify the multifaceted vulnerabilities within these 
communities. This will be achieved by employing the proposed autoencoder-based aggre­
gation method described in the previous section. This analysis aims to identify risk factors 
that may hinder sustainable growth and diminish the quality of life for residents. The SEDI 
will define critical vulnerability thresholds, supporting policymakers with essential data to 
design targeted interventions. By highlighting the specific vulnerabilities of Florence’s sub­
urban areas, the SEDI will guide the creation of tailored policies and measures aimed at 
strengthening social cohesion, enhancing economic opportunities, and improving overall 
community well-being. In doing so, the proposal will lay the foundation for more sustain­
able and equitable urban development in Florence.
4.1  Three Pillars for Vulnerability
Urban vulnerability has been operationalised along three main lineages (Romero-Lankao 
and Qin, 2011): a natural hazards approach, centred on exposure to environmental threats; 
an inherent vulnerability perspective, emphasising the socioeconomic, demographic, and 
institutional conditions that constrain coping capacity; and a resilience perspective, fram­
ing cities as coupled human–environment systems. Each lineage implies a different domain 
structure. The CDC/ATSDR Social Vulnerability Index (Flanagan et al., 2011), for instance, 
groups 16 census variables into four themes — socioeconomic status, household composi­
tion and disability, minority status, and housing type and transportation — to support disas­
ter preparedness, while broader frameworks such as the Social–Ecological–Technological 
Systems approach (McPhearson et al., 2016) further integrate ecological and infrastructural 
dimensions.
The SEDI index proposed in this work is positioned within the inherent vulnerability 
tradition, with a specific focus on socioeconomic and demographic conditions at the sub-
municipal scale. The choice of three domains — economic, demographic, and social — fol­
lows the established framework for sub-municipal vulnerability assessment in Italy, adopted 
in comparable studies for Bologna (Città metropolitana di Bologna, 2022), Naples (Città 


1 3
28 
Page 12 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
metropolitana di Napoli, 2022), and other Italian municipalities (Busetta and Milito, 2010; 
Davino et al., 2021; Tronu, 2020). This tradition is oriented towards informing local social 
policy and urban planning rather than assessing exposure to environmental hazards.
One of the primary objectives of public policy is to address vulnerabilities within the 
population. Developing tools to support this goal is an evolving focus within the fields 
of social statistics and public policy, as highlighted by Saisana and Philippas (2012) and 
Khan (1991). In recent years, a substantial body of research has emerged, focusing on the 
measurement of these intricate concepts, resulting in the development of a wide range of 
synthetic indicators. Following previous works on the socio-economic and demographic 
vulnerability in Italy (Busetta and Milito, 2010; Tronu, 2020), even at sub-municipal level, 
both in Italy (Città metropolitana di Bologna, 2022; Città metropolitana di Napoli, 2022; 
Davino et al., 2021), and in Europe (Martínez et al., 2024; von Szombathely et al., 2023), we 
adopt a theoretical framework based on three sub-pillars for SEDI: economic vulnerability, 
demographic vulnerability and social vulnerability.
The study of demographics in evaluating a territory’s vulnerability is grounded in assess­
ing the population’s needs within its social context. Specifically, we can identify at least 
three major demographic factors that can be interpreted as precursors of vulnerability for a 
social environment: ageing population, low birth rate and depopulation. The gradual ageing 
of the population is a well-known phenomenon that is transforming the social and economic 
landscape of the 21st century (Christensen et al., 2009), placing increasing pressure on 
policymakers to enhance healthcare services and improve the living conditions of older 
adults (Skouby et al., 2014). The evolution of Italian demographics, in particular, suggests 
that this is a central theme for the planning and management of a territory (Reynaud and 
Miccoli, 2019). Consequently, identifying areas of the city most at risk due to population 
aging is essential for designing targeted interventions and ensuring the provision of facilities 
that adequately respond to this demographic challenge. The second dimension representing 
a demographic challenge is the low birth rate, as highlighted by Billari and Kohler (2004). 
Previous analyses conducted in other metropolitan areas and several ISTAT reports have 
highlighted the vulnerability associated with the imbalance between births and deaths, with 
particular emphasis on low birth rates. Consequently, we adopt the “natural balance" as 
an indicator to capture this specific demographic dimension. The third factor indicative of 
demographic vulnerability is the depopulation of certain areas. This phenomenon becomes 
particularly evident in studies involving comparisons between municipal areas, where dis­
parities between urban centers and inland regions highlight the trend towards depopulation 
(Pinilla et al., 2008; Vendemmia et al., 2021). At the sub-municipal level, the effects of 
depopulation are likely less pronounced, but nonetheless significant. The deterioration of 
the social cohesion of a neighborhood can push people to move away from it and to relo­
cate to more attractive residential areas, consequently, the decrease in population in an area 
not due to the natural balance can be interpreted as a loss of attractiveness of the area and 
regarded as a sign of vulnerability.
Focusing on the economic aspects, we identify the relative poverty indicator and the 
indicator of insufficient capital accumulation, proxied by the share of citizens paying rent, 
as major sources of vulnerability. The relationship between poverty and vulnerability is 
well documented in the literature (Adger, 2014; Coulthard et al., 2018; Staveren et al., 
2014), with higher vulnerability typically observed in economically disadvantaged areas. 
Beyond income-based measures, we include the share of renters as a proxy for long-term 


1 3
Page 13 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
asset deprivation. In the Italian institutional context, where the homeownership rate exceeds 
74%, real-estate property constitutes the primary vehicle for household wealth accumula­
tion and intergenerational transfer (Ferrante et al., 2021; Guiso and Jappelli, 2002). At the 
area level, a high share of renters therefore signals lower aggregate capital accumulation, 
capturing a complementary dimension of economic vulnerability that current income alone 
does not reflect. We note that direct measures of household wealth are not available at the 
sub-municipal level in Italy, making housing tenure the best available proxy at this territo­
rial granularity. Additionally, we include median individual and median family income, as 
lower income levels are consistently associated with reduced coping capacity and height­
ened vulnerability at the area level (Cutter et al., 2003; Davino et al., 2021).
To capture social vulnerability, we employ a set of variables, among which the presence 
of elderly residents living alone emerged as a key indicator, given their often greater need 
for health and social care (Golden et al., 2009; Roh and Weon, 2022; Victor et al., 2000). 
Additionally, we consider the vulnerability of minors in single-parent households, who may 
require greater social protection and assistance (Bianchi, 2014; Bianchi and Milkie, 2010). 
Minors from foreign-origin families are also included, given the potential challenges they 
face in integrating into Florentine schools and the broader social fabric (Bloemraad et al., 
2023; Scardigno, 2019). Moreover, drawing on prior research (Davino et al., 2021), we 
assume that higher levels of educational attainment are associated with lower social vul­
nerability, insofar as they enhance resilience at both the individual and community levels. 
Accordingly, we include the percentage of graduates residing in each area as an indica­
tor. Finally, the proportion of vacant housing units is incorporated as a proxy for potential 
neighborhood abandonment, a condition frequently linked to increased social vulnerability.
The interplay across these dimensions is documented in the literature: for instance, it 
has been observed premature aging across lower income classes in Steptoe and Zaninotto 
(2020), or correlations across depressed areas with sizable integration issues (Chakraborty 
et al., 2020; Majid et al., 2020).
A comprehensive vulnerability framework would ideally encompass additional dimen­
sions beyond the three considered here. A health dimension — hospitalisation rates, chronic 
disease prevalence, access to healthcare — is well established in the social determinants 
literature (Cutter et al., 2003; Flanagan et al., 2011; Khazanchi et al., 2020). An ecologi­
cal dimension — urban heat islands, flood risk, air quality, green space — is central to the 
environmental vulnerability tradition (Romero-Lankao and Qin, 2011). A cultural dimen­
sion — access to cultural services, community participation — would further capture social 
cohesion and collective resilience. However, none of these indicators are currently available 
at the sub-municipal level in Italy from the administrative sources employed here, and the 
three domains retained for the SEDI represent the best feasible operationalization at the 
required territorial granularity.
4.2  The Data
Almost all the indicators mentioned in Section 4.1 are based on data collected during 2021. 
Demographic and social indicators are sourced from the Civil Registry of Florence while 
economic indicators are provided by the Italian Revenue Agency (Agenzia delle Entrate - 
AdE) and further elaborated by the Municipality of Florence. The only indicators not refer­
ring to the year 2021 are the percentage of graduates and the percentage of unused dwellings 


1 3
28 
Page 14 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
that are derived from the 2011 census. Table 1 presents the main descriptive statistics related 
to all elementary indices considered along with their respective sources.
As units of observation, we assume the i n line-eq-IEq46 suburban units into which the area of 
Florence is partitioned. These units represent a middle-level aggregation between the census 
areas and the broader administrative districts of Florence, which would be too large for the 
scope of this study. Even if these units stem from administrative sources, they represent 
homogeneous partitions of the city, particularly relevant for our purposes. Two of them 
were excluded from the analysis, as their population is too scarce to have reliable estimates 
(under 100 inhabitants).
Table 1  Descriptive statistics of the elementary indexes – Mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, 
median, first and third quantile
Domain
El­
ementary 
Index
Mean
st.dev.
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Source
Demography
% Over 
80
9.600
2.085
1.261
8.420
9.680
10.964
15.028
Fl. civil 
registry
inline-eq-IEq45 
population
−2.867
3.471
−11.337
−4.430
−2.942
−1.563
16.098
Fl. civil 
registry
Natural 
Balance
−29.310
21.070
−94.200
−40.900
−26.600
−14.850
4.000
Fl. civil 
registry
Social
% 
Over65 
living 
alone
9.210
1.733
0.840
8.262
9.500
10.083
12.973
Fl. civil 
registry
% 
Under18 
foreigners
16.279
8.277
2.308
10.586
14.529
19.657
39.159
Fl. civil 
registry
% Under 
18 – 
Single 
parent
42.580
5.720
18.520
39.110
42.180
44.920
64.780
Fl. civil 
registry
% 
Unused 
dwellings
3.578
2.737
0.271
1.684
2.976
4.647
14.506
2011 
Census
% 
Graduated
37.490
10.445
14.800
30.460
38.170
46.330
57.080
2011 
Census
% Pop. 
circulation
1.613
2.099
2.917
3.275
3.585
3.928
15.918
Fl. civil 
registry
Economic
% people 
under 
poverty 
line
32.970
3.751
21.170
30.660
32.700
34.710
42.880
AdE
% rents
20.628
6.721
8.092
15.711
19.269
25.226
37.841
2011 
Census
Median 
Income 
(indi­
vidual)
20801
2207
16164
19340
20564
21622
29048
AdE
Median 
Income 
(family)
28979
4255
19984
26280
28268
30919
47774
AdE


1 3
Page 15 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
4.3  Results
In this section, we present the estimation and discussion of SEDI index using the Autosynth 
methodology for the suburban Florentine case study. It is worth noting that we first scale the 
original outcome using the formula described in Eq. 1, and then we applied the Autosynth 
to this dataset, by specifying equal weights W and bias vector i n line-eq-IEq47.
The analysis of the results presented in Fig. 2, allows us to evaluate the performance of 
the SEDI in capturing the latent vulnerability across the sub-municipal areas of Florence 
and to compare it with the two reference indices: AMPI and the PCA-based index. As speci­
fied in the previous sections, while PCA and AMPI do not allow for an uncertainty evalua­
tion, Autosynth is an inherently stochastic methodology and thus, we obtain a distribution of 
results by iterating 500 times the calculation. Here we report the median of the distribution 
of results. Discussion of the results is based on the SEDI index we got from Autosynth, as 
PCA and AMPI are reported only for comparative purposes (Table 2).
A visual examination of the results reveals that the areas exhibiting the greatest vulner­
ability are the historic city center and the western parts of Florence, see Table 3. On the 
other hand, the least vulnerable areas are located in the eastern suburbs and in the south 
area, which is a worldly known area for the beauty of the landscape, as depicted in Table 3. 
These findings are consistent with previous analyses conducted on the same case study by 
Dugheri et al. (2023).
It may seem counterintuitive that one of the areas facing the most significant socio-eco­
nomic and demographic challenges is the historic center, a UNESCO World Heritage Site 
known worldwide. However, one must consider the gentrification that has occurred in this 
area: alongside historic residences, there are older and more affordable apartments, often 
inhabited by students or immigrants who cannot afford renovated housing. Additionally, the 
historic center has, in recent years, experienced widespread conversion of many apartments 
into Airbnbs rentals, reducing the number of dwellings available to permanent residents.
Another area that emerges as more fragile is West Florence. This area has exhibited 
systemic vulnerabilities for years, being on average one of the areas with the lowest median 
income in the city. However, unlike the historic center–which is characterized by significant 
economic disparities–West Florence presents a more uniform profile, with widespread chal­
lenges but fewer instances of social marginalization (Fig. 3).
By comparing the results from the three methods, we observe that all the methods pro­
duce reasonably similar estimates. In particular, Autosynth and PCA produce very similar 
estimates, leading to similar conclusions over composite vulnerability in Florence. This 
results is confirmed both in the absolute values of the index, which are similar, but most and 
Fig. 2  AMPI, PCA and AutoSynth vulnerability Index for Florence, normed data
 


1 3
28 
Page 16 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
more importantly in the ranks across the sub-municipal areas, which are a crucial point in 
the analysis of the composite indicators.
This is not unexpected, as both techniques aim to reduce information from a multidimen­
sional space to a one-dimensional one. In contrast, the results obtained through the AMPI 
differ noticeably in the absolute values of the vulnerability index. Despite this discrep­
ancy, the ranking of the sub-municipal areas remains quite similar across all three methods. 
Figure 4 shows that the majority of autosynth samples have a lower stress with respect to the 
alternative methods. We conclude that the ordering provided by the SEDI index is not particu­
larly sensitive to the chosen aggregation method, but that AutoSynth offers better performance 
in reproducing the original information.
Table 3  Most and least vulnerable areas in Florence, ranked according the autosynth index
Most vulnerable areas
Least vulnerable areas
AMPI
AutoSynth PCA
AMPI
AutoSynth PCA
Aeroporto
87.80
114.12
60.00
Calatafimi
97.01
60.00
102.00
S. Jacopino
100.01
114.94
119.97
Bagnese - Fiume Greve
97.24
71.83
100.75
Peretola
108.76
115.78
119.67
Libertà - Fortezza
96.15
75.33
92.60
Novoli - Lippi
106.84
116.46
117.07
Cure
99.38
77.03
96.02
Mercato Centrale
117.70
123.29
122.96
S. Gervasio
90.38
79.32
80.43
Coverciano
105.05
130.00
124.76
Torre del Gallo
92.45
79.97
75.23
Fig. 3  Rank statistics for the AMPI, PCA and AutoSynth vulnerability Index for Florence, normed data
 
Elementary Index
Input weights
Indicator relevance
% Over 80
0.08
0.07
inline-eq-IEq48 population
0.08
0.04
Natural Balance
0.08
0.07
% Over65 living alone
0.08
0.09
% Under18 foreigners
0.08
0.06
% Under 18 - Single parent
0.08
0.07
% Unused dwellings
0.08
0.04
% Graduated
0.08
0.09
% Pop. circulation
0.08
0.08
% people under poverty line
0.08
0.08
% rents
0.08
0.06
Median Income (individual)
0.08
0.07
Median Income (family)
0.08
0.06
Table 2  Average Input and 
Indicator relevance for the calcu­
lation of the autosynth index for 
Florence, normed dataset
 


1 3
Page 17 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
Table 2 reports the values for input weights and indicator relevance after the index calcu­
lation. All elementary indicators contribute to the SEDI calculation, with two slight excep­
tions: the share of unused dwellings (%) and the population change (inline-eq-IEq49), both of which 
appear slightly less relevant than the other variables. We stress that in this work we remain 
agnostic towards the choice of input weights, thus their value correspond to i
nline-eq-IEq50. Moreover, 
from indicator relevance, calculated according to Eq. 5 we can notice that the variables that 
represents more heavily the latent phenomena are the share of graduated people, less prone 
to social vulnerability, probably with higher revenues and a better social security network, 
and the share of elderly living alone. However, there are no dramatic differences across the 
indicator relevances.
5  AutoSynth Index in a Different Context: Assessing Community 
Vulnerability in the U.S.
This section applies AutoSynth to a second empirical context to assess its performance 
beyond the case study that motivated this work. While the Florence application is the 
motivating case study, where the substantive framework is developed following the Ital­
ian sub-municipal vulnerability literature, the U.S. application serves as a methodological 
validation: its purpose is to test AutoSynth on a dataset with fundamentally different char­
acteristics — N=3,136 counties versus N=74 suburban units, a different data structure, and 
independently defined indicators. Accordingly, the dimensional structure of the Community 
Vulnerability Index (CVI), encompassing economic, social, health, and cultural domains 
reflects the structure of the available dataset. Community vulnerability is a cross-border 
phenomenon: conditions in one county often spill over into neighbouring regions, generat­
ing dynamics that amplify vulnerability at the regional scale.
Our goal is to identify areas within the US exhibiting the highest levels of vulnerability 
and to assess the regions experiencing the greatest levels of socioeconomic deprivation 
nationwide. Such analysis can also offer valuable insights to support more targeted and 
effective policy interventions. Also in this case, the results are evaluated by comparing them 
with those obtained using the two reference indices: the AMPI (Mazziotta and Pareto, 2018) 
and a composite index based on PCA (Mishra, 2007).
Fig. 4  Stress values for autosynth index, com­
pared to the other methods - normed data
 


1 3
28 
Page 18 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
We examined four main domains representing specific dimensions for CVI: economic, 
social, health, and cultural vulnerability. These dimensions collectively represent the broader 
phenomenon of vulnerability and frequently overlap. Specifically, the correlation between 
community vulnerability and health conditions is particularly relevant and well-documented 
in the literature (Cutter et al., 2003; Khazanchi et al., 2020). Communities experiencing 
heightened vulnerability often show poorer health outcomes due to limited access to health­
care resources (Bourgois et al., 2017; Gaynor and Wilson, 2020), higher exposure to envi­
ronmental hazards (Fekete, 2009; Lehnert et al., 2020), and increased prevalence of chronic 
diseases (Yu et al., 2020). Understanding these correlations is critical, as it highlights the 
importance of integrated interventions aimed at simultaneously addressing vulnerability and 
improving health outcomes.
The presence of correlated indicators poses a significant challenge for researchers 
attempting to construct synthetic indices. Omitting highly correlated variables might reduce 
redundancy but simultaneously risks losing important information. In such cases, methods 
that effectively capture overall variance, such as those based on dimensionality reduction, 
allow researchers to retain comprehensive information without forcing drastic compromises 
in the dataset (Fig. 5).
Drawing on the dataset provided by CDC (2019), we rely on information for 3,136 U.S. 
counties, updated to 2019, encompassing 14 distinct dimensions. Table 4 presents selected 
descriptive statistics for these dimensions. Economic vulnerability is proxied by the median 
earnings in the county, the Gini coefficient as a measure of unequal distribution of wealth, 
the unemployment rate, and the overall population living under the poverty threshold. Cul­
tural vulnerability is measured by the share of school enrollment, the share of graduate 
degrees, and the share of people who left school before completing high school. Moreover, 
health vulnerability is represented by the share of obesity and the share of uninsured inhabit­
ants. Finally, social vulnerability is captured through the ethnic composition, and the share 
of children and the elderly living in poverty. Table 5 reports the input weights and the indica­
tor relevance, calculated accondingly Eq. 5. As we pointed out, we opt for uniform weights 
for all the elementary indicators, so their weights corresponds to 1, with p the number of 
Fig. 5  Stress values for autosynth index, compared to the other methods - normed data
 


1 3
Page 19 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
elementary indicators. From ex-post indicator relevance instead we can see that the % of 
uninsured people was the most salient to construct the CVI, probably grasping one of the 
most alarm bell for social vulnerability: the absence of a large share of population that can­
not afford medical care.
Results are obtained by iteratively applying the AutoSynth procedure to the original data­
set, scaled according to Eq. 1. We repeat the estimation process 500 times, here we report 
the median value for the index distribution. Figure 6 and 7 (on the left) reports the Commu­
nity vulnerability index calculated with AutoSynth at the county level in the US for 2019, 
in absolute value and ranks. Notably, the index reveals a clear spatial pattern and identifies 
distinct clusters of vulnerability, specifically:
Table 4  Descriptive statistics for elementary indicators employed
Domain
Elementary Index
Mean
st.dev
5%
Median
95%
Cultural
% No High School
16.89
7.34
7.40
15.40
30.40
% Graduate
6.44
3.85
2.70
5.30
13.90
% Sch. Enroll
74.97
5.06
66.60
75.15
82.75
Economic
Earnings - 2010$
25448
5062
19002
24813
34872
% Poverty - All
15.46
6.37
6.90
14.65
27.21
Gini Index
0.43
0.04
0.37
0.42
0.49
% Unemployment
0.07
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.12
Social
%White
78.81
19.60
38.48
86.35
97.40
%Afro-american
8.78
14.40
0.10
1.95
41.41
% Poverty - 65+
11.48
5.47
5.15
10.25
22.01
% Poverty - 6-
24.85
11.87
7.40
23.77
47.12
% Child - Single parent
31.62
9.90
16.43
30.60
49.25
Health
Obesity rate
0.31
0.04
0.23
0.30
0.37
Uninsured rate
0.18
0.05
0.10
0.18
0.27
Elementary Index
Input weights
Indicator relevance
% No High School
0.07
0.08
% Graduate
0.07
0.06
% Sch. Enroll
0.07
0.08
Earnings - 2010$
0.07
0.05
% Poverty - All
0.07
0.05
Gini Index
0.07
0.05
% Unemployment
0.07
0.05
% White
0.07
0.09
% Afro-american
0.07
0.07
% Poverty - 65+
0.07
0.05
% Poverty - 6-
0.07
0.06
% Child - Single parent
0.07
0.05
Obesity rate
0.07
0.06
Uninsured rate
0.07
0.18
Table 5  Average Input and 
Indicator relevance for the calcu­
lation of the autosynth index for 
US counties, normed dataset
 


1 3
28 
Page 20 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
	
●
The urban area of New York, Washington and Philadelphia seems to show the lowest 
levels of vulnerability, as well as the New England area and the Boston area. We can 
expect this result, as these are the most developed areas of the US.
	
●
On the other hand, the south bend of the US spanning from the Carolinas to Texas exhib­
its a higher level of vulnerability, especially in Mississippi and Louisiana.
	
●
Midwest, Central US and Rocky Mountain states show lower levels of vulnerability.
Table 6 reports the six most fragile counties and the six least fragile counties in the US. 
Remarkably, half of the most vulnerable ones are in Mississippi, while the other three lie in 
neighbouring states, confirming the cross-border hypothesis. On the other hand, two-thirds 
of the least vulnerable counties are in Virginia, highlighting the existence of a low vulner­
ability area in the Atlantic coast and New England. These results sound comparable with 
our expectations and with the results from CDC (2025). We find that the wealthier areas are 
Table 6  Most and least vulnerable counties, ranked according to the autosynth index
Most vulnerable areas
Least vulnerable areas
AMPI
AutoSynth
PCA
AMPI
AutoSynth PCA
Jefferson County, 
Mississippi
108.25
121.50
123.34
Los Alamos 
County, New 
Mexico
78.15
70.00 71.29
Allendale County, South 
Carolina
108.61
121.67
124.27
Falls Church 
city, Virginia
80.96
72.69 70.00
Humphreys County, 
Mississippi
108.85
121.92
127.15
Loudoun County, 
Virginia
81.13
74.41 78.24
Wilcox County, Alabama
108.52
122.11
126.19
Douglas County, 
Colorado
81.48
75.54 79.50
Holmes County, 
Mississippi
109.60
123.48
128.55
Fairfax County, 
Virginia
82.27
76.00 80.65
East Carroll Parish, 
Louisiana
113.56
130.00
129.43
Arlington 
County, Virginia
82.81
76.07 79.17
Fig. 7  Rank statistics for the AMPI, PCA and AutoSynth vulnerability Index for US counties, normed data
 
Fig. 6  AMPI, PCA and AutoSynth vulnerability Index for US counties, normed data
 


1 3
Page 21 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
also the ones that exhibit lower levels of vulnerability, while more depressed counties seem 
to suffer from multiple sources of vulnerability.
Turning now to the evaluation of the AutoSynth methodology by benchmarking it against 
alternative aggregation approaches used to construct synthetic indices, the comparison of 
the resulting Community vulnerability Index across different methods reveals remarkably 
consistent geographic patterns, with areas of highest vulnerability remaining stable regard­
less of the aggregation technique applied. This finding provides strong evidence of the 
robustness and reliability of the proposed method compared to existing alternatives in the 
literature. In terms of stress values, as depicted in Fig. 5, Autosynth consistently exhibits 
lower stress values compared to its competitors, producing an improved representation of 
the euclidean distance between the representation of elementary indicators from US coun­
ties. To illustrate, a median stress value of 0.45 for AutoSynth, compared with 0.72 
for PCA and 0.83 for AMPI (Fig. 5), indicates that the one-dimensional representation 
produced by AutoSynth preserves the pairwise Euclidean distances among counties in the 
original 14-dimensional indicator space more faithfully than either alternative. In practical 
terms, if two counties are far apart in their composite socio-economic profiles, AutoSynth is 
more likely to reflect this distance in the final index, reducing the distortion introduced by 
the dimensionality reduction. This further confirms the effectiveness and robustness of the 
proposed method. A comparison between the application of AutoSynth in this case and its 
implementation in the Florence study discussed in Section 4 can yield additional insights 
into the performance and adaptability of the AutoSynth index. We can notice that the stress 
performances over the US dataset are lower compared with the stress performances in the 
Florentine case. This results was expected, as the US counties dataset is forty times larger 
than the Florentine one, and this richness of observation help the estimation of the index. 
Thus we can advise to use Autosynth especially in presence of large and complex dataset, 
even if the performances are remarkable even in presence of few observations.
6  Simulations
In this section, we present a simulation study designed to evaluate the information com­
pression capacity of the AutoSynth procedure across a range of scenarios, varying in the 
characteristics and interrelations of the underlying elementary indices. The performance 
of AutoSynth is benchmarked against three alternative synthetic aggregation methods: the 
arithmetic mean, the AMPI, and a composite index based on PCA. Please refer to Section 2 
for a review of these aggregation methods.
In both applications to real data considered in the previous sections, we observed that 
the main advantage of the AutoSynth Index suggested in this paper, compared to AMPI and 
the PCA-based index, is its capability to represent the input elementary indicators, thereby 
better reproducing the original dimensions within a single feature space. To investigate this 
property more rigorously, we designed a simulation study spanning scenarios in which the 
elementary indices vary both in their distributional characteristics and in the strength and 
form of their interrelationships. Specifically, 3 distinct data-generating processes (DGPs) 
were considered in this study, and for each, 3 different sample sizes were used. More in 
detail, the three DGPs, all including fourteen variables representing the elementary indices, 
are as follows:


1 3
28 
Page 22 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
	
●
IID variables: The elementary indicators are independent and identically distributed, 
with a Normal distribution
	
●
Correlated ID variables: The elementary indicators are correlated, but all follow the 
same distribution, which, as in the previous case, is the normal distribution. The correla­
tions among the elementary indicators range from -0.87 to 0.79.
	
●
Correlated, no ID distributions: The elementary indicators are correlated and follow 
different distributions: two uniform distributions, a inline-eq-IEq5
2 distribution, a Poisson distribu­
tion, an exponential distribution, a Student’s t-distribution, and three normal distribu­
tions. The correlations among the elementary indicators range between -0.85 and 0.91.
The three values chosen for the sample sizes are 50, 250, and 1000. For each of the 3x3 com­
binations of DGP and sample size, the number of replications is 1000. The hyperparameters of 
the distributions have been simulated from appropriate uniform distributions. We opt for pre-
treating the elementary indicators by scaling them with Eq. 1. In this way, we are not altering 
the shape of the distribution, but are rescaling the units in a common range to avoid the vari­
ability of an elementary indicator prevailing over the others and affecting the final representa­
tion of the latent phenomena.
In all simulation scenarios, AutoSynth achieves lower median stress values than compet­
ing methods in preserving inter-observational distances. However, the magnitude of the 
improvement varies with sample size: for small samples (i n line-eq-IEq53) the gain over conven­
tional methods depends on the dependency structure and independence across variables 
(see Figs. 8, 9 and 10). This gain becomes increasingly pronounced as n grows, a trend not 
observed in competing algorithms. Moreover, being based on neural network optimisation, 
AutoSynth is inherently stochastic: repeated runs on the same data produce a distribution 
of solutions rather than a unique index. While this variability is mitigated by iterating the 
procedure and reporting a summary statistic (we use the median of 500 runs), estimation 
instability is more pronounced with small samples. When the performance advantage over 
simpler, deterministic methods is marginal and the resulting rankings are comparable, the 
additional complexity may not be warranted. Accordingly, while AutoSynth is competitive 
regardless of sample size, its adoption is especially advantageous for large and complex 
datasets, where its flexibility yields substantial and stable gains.
Fig. 8  Stress values for the synthetic index - IID case
 


1 3
Page 23 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
Finally, as shown in Fig. 10, AutoSynth excels at aggregating variables with heteroge­
neous distributions across a variety of data configurations. In the Appendix, we report in 
Figs. 12, 13, 14, the variability of the stress values applied to the ranks instead of being 
applied to the dataset, in our idea this measure represents the stability of the estimation 
procedures.
7  Conclusions
In this study, we introduced AutoSynth, an innovative methodology for the construction of 
composite indices, leveraging the capabilities of autoencoders. This approach distinguishes 
itself through its data-driven dimensionality reduction, effectively addressing the limitations 
inherent in traditional linear methods such as PCA. Through a series of rigorous simulation 
studies and applications to real-world datasets, we have demonstrated AutoSynth’s capac­
ity to accurately capture complex, non-linear relationships within data, thereby providing a 
more precise and meaningful representation of multidimensional phenomena.
The flexibility of AutoSynth is particularly evident in its ability to manage heterogeneous 
data, characterised by varying distributions and diverse sample sizes. This characteristic 
renders it exceptionally suitable for the analysis of intricate socio-economic phenomena, 
where variables often exhibit disparate behavioral patterns. Furthermore, the provision for 
Fig. 10  Stress values for the synthetic index - Non independent nor ID case
 
Fig. 9  Stress values for the synthetic index - Non independent, ID case
 


1 3
28 
Page 24 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
incorporating expert-defined input weights facilitates the integration of prior knowledge 
into the index construction process, enhancing the relevance and accuracy of the resulting 
composite indices.
Moreover, this work introduces a method for constructing the elementary indicators rel­
evance as the reconstruction error in the synthetic index. This value allow us to understand 
which indicators are more salient to represent the latent phenomenon, fostering its under­
standing. We leverage Autosynth to depict the vulnerability of communities into two main 
examples: the SEDI index for calculating vulnerability in Florentine suburbs and the CVI 
index to assess vulnerability across US counties.
The application of our proposed AutoSynth methodology to assess socio-economic and 
demographic vulnerability in the sub-municipal areas of Florence revealed distinct pat­
terns of vulnerability across the city. Notably, the historic city center and western Florence 
emerged as areas with the highest levels of vulnerability, a finding consistent with previous 
studies. This counterintuitive result for the historic center can be attributed to gentrification 
and the proliferation of short-term rentals, which have altered the area’s socio-economic 
landscape. Conversely, the eastern and southern suburbs, known for their scenic beauty, 
exhibited the lowest levels of vulnerability. Comparative analysis with traditional meth­
ods, such as AMPI and PCA, demonstrated that AutoSynth produced comparable results, 
particularly in ranking the areas, while exhibiting lower stress values. This suggests that 
the ordering of sub-municipal areas by vulnerability is robust across different aggregation 
methods, with AutoSynth providing a more accurate representation of the underlying data 
structure. The identified patterns of vulnerability underscore the complex interplay of socio-
economic and demographic factors in Florence, highlighting the need for targeted policy 
interventions to address these disparities.
AutoSynth analysis of U.S. county vulnerability revealed distinct patterns: urban areas 
showed low vulnerability, while the southern belt exhibited high vulnerability, particularly 
in Mississippi and Louisiana. AutoSynth outperformed traditional methods in representing 
inter-county distances, confirming its effectiveness in assessing community vulnerability.
Finally, we study the empirical properties of the proposed aggregation method with a 
simulation study in which we test several different DGPs and sample sizes, stressing how 
AutoSynth is a non-inferior choice to common aggregation methods, which outperforms the 
three alternative methods (arithmetic mean, AMPI, PCA) when the sample size is large or 
when the elementary indicators’ distribution is non-i.i.d..
Despite the promising outcomes, it is imperative to acknowledge the limitations of our 
study. Specifically, further exploration is warranted to optimize the parameter selection of 
the autoencoder and to evaluate the impact of diverse distance metrics on the results. Addi­
tionally, the application of sequential autoencoders for the construction of hierarchical indi­
ces represents a promising avenue for future research, potentially enabling the analysis of 
complex phenomena at varying levels of granularity.
Regarding future perspectives, we posit that AutoSynth possesses significant potential 
for application across a broad spectrum of domains. Its capacity to synthesise complex 
information into meaningful indices can be particularly instrumental in informing policy 
decisions, monitoring progress towards sustainable development goals, and evaluating the 


1 3
Page 25 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
impact of multifaceted interventions. Moreover, the integration of AutoSynth with other 
advanced data analysis techniques, such as predictive modeling and interactive visualiza­
tion, may unlock new frontiers in the comprehension of multidimensional phenomena.
In conclusion, the AutoSynth methodology represents a substantial advancement in 
the construction of composite indices, offering a data-driven, flexible, and interpretable 
approach. Its ability to capture non-linear relationships, manage heterogeneous data, and 
integrate expert knowledge renders it a valuable tool for the analysis of complex phenomena 
in diverse contexts.
Appendix
In the appendix we report additional material to the main text. Firstly, we report the sche­
matized of the calculation procedure for AutoSynth, described formally in the main text. 
Secondly, we provide additional results for the simulation study described in Section 6. We 
estimate the stress test described in Eq. 6, but applied to the values of observations’ ranks, 
as following
	
di s
p
l
a
y
-e
q-Equ7

(7)
with inli n
e
- e
q
-I
Eq5 4
 and i
nlin e
-
eq-I
E q5 5
, where 
inline-eq-IEq56 is the rank operator.
Fig. 11  Index Construction Algorithm.


1 3
28 
Page 26 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
Fig. 14  Rank stress values for the synthetic index - Non independent nor ID case
 
Fig. 13  Rank stress values for the synthetic index - Non independent, ID case
 
Fig. 12  Rank stress values for the synthetic index - IID case
 


1 3
Page 27 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
Acknowledgements  The authors are thankful to Gianni Dugheri for the insightful comments.
Funding  Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Firenze within the CRUI-CARE Agree­
ment. The authors thank the UNIFI4FUTURE - SPARKLING Grant B17G24000250006.
Data Availability  Data about this work are either publicly available or available upon request.
Declarations
Competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adger, W.N., & Winkels, A. (2014). Vulnerability, poverty and sustaining well-being. Handbook of sustain­
able development (pp. 206–216). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Bandura, R. (2011). Composite indicators and rankings: Inventory 2011 (Technical Report). New York: 
Office of Development Studies, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Bank, D., Koenigstein, N., & Giryes, R. (2023). Autoencoders. Machine learning for data science handbook: 
data mining and knowledge discovery handbook, 353–374.
Bianchi, S.M. (2014). The changing demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of single parent fami­
lies. Single parent families (pp. 71–97). Routledge.
Bianchi, S. M., & Milkie, M. A. (2010). Work and family research in the first decade of the 21st century. 
Journal of marriage and family, 72(3), 705–725.
Billari, F., & Kohler, H.-P. (2004). Patterns of low and lowest-low fertility in europe. Population studies, 
58(2), 161–176.
Bloemraad, I., Esses, V.M., Kymlicka, W., & Zhou, Y.-Y. (2023). Unpacking immigrant integration: Con­
cepts, mechanisms, and context. World Bank.
Bourgois, P., Holmes, S. M., Sue, K., & Quesada, J. (2017). Structural vulnerability: operationalizing the 
concept to address health disparities in clinical care. Academic Medicine, 92(3), 299–307.
Busetta, A., & Milito, A. M. (2010). Socio-demographic vulnerability: The condition of italian young people. 
Social indicators research, 97, 375–396.
CDC (2019). CDC/ATSDR social vulnerability index 2019 database, United States (Tech. Rep.). Geospatial 
Research, Analysis, and Services Program. Retrieved from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​a​t​s​d​r​.​c​d​c​.​g​o​v​/​p​l​a​c​e​a​n​d​h​e​a​l​t​h​/​s​
v​i​/​d​a​t​a​d​o​c​u​m​e​n​t​a​t​i​o​n​d​o​w​n​l​o​a​d​.​h​t​m​l​
CDC (2025). Cdc/atsdr social vulnerability index interactive map 2022 database us. Dataset. Retrieved from 
https://www​.atsdr.cdc.​gov/place-h​ealth/ph​p/svi/sviinteractive-map.html (Accessed: 2025-03-11)
Chakraborty, L., Rus, H., Henstra, D., Thistlethwaite, J., & Scott, D. (2020). A place-based socioeconomic 
status index: Measuring social vulnerability to flood hazards in the context of environmental justice. 
International journal of disaster risk reduction, 43, Article 101394.
Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R., & Vaupel, J. W. (2009). Ageing populations: the challenges 
ahead. The lancet, 374(9696), 1196–1208.
Città metropolitana di Bologna (2022). La fragilit‘a demografica, sociale ed economica nelle diverse aree del 
comune di bologna – edizione 2022. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​i​n​u​m​e​r​i​d​i​b​o​l​o​g​n​a​m​e​t​r​o​p​o​l​i​t​a​n​a​.​i​t​/​s​t​u​d​i​-​e​-​r​i​c​e​r​c​h​e​/​l​a​-​f​r​a​g​i​l​
i​t​a​d​e​m​o​g​r​a​f​i​c​a​-​s​o​c​i​a​l​e​-​e​d​-​e​c​o​n​o​m​i​c​a​-​n​e​l​l​e​-​d​i​v​e​r​s​e​-​a​r​e​e​-​d​e​l​-​c​o​m​u​n​e​-​d​i​. Retrieved Nov 24, 2023, from ​
h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​i​n​u​m​e​r​i​d​i​b​o​l​o​g​n​a​m​e​t​r​o​p​o​l​i​t​a​n​a​.​i​t​/​s​t​u​d​i​-​e​r​i​c​e​r​c​h​e​/​l​a​-​f​r​a​g​i​l​i​t​a​-​d​e​m​o​g​r​a​f​i​c​a​-​s​o​c​i​a​l​e​-​e​d​-​e​c​o​n​o​m​i​c​
a​-​n​e​l​l​e​-​d​i​v​e​r​s​e​-​a​r​e​e​-​d​e​l​c​o​m​u​n​e​-​d​i​


1 3
28 
Page 28 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
Città metropolitana di Napoli (2022). Vulnerabilit‘a demografica, sociale ed economica dei comuni dell’area 
metropolitana di napoli - studi, analisi e rappresentazione. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​c​i​t​t​a​m​e​t​r​o​p​o​l​i​t​a​n​a​.​n​a​.​i​t​/​s​t​u​d​i​-​e​-​
a​n​a​l​i​s​i​. Retrieved Nov 24, 2023, from https://www​.cittametro​politana.na​.it/stud​i-e-analisi
Comim, F., & Amaral, P. V. (2013). The human values index: conceptual foundations and evidence from 
brazil. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 37(6), 1221–1241.
Coulthard, S., McGregor, J.A., & White, C. (2018). Multiple dimensions of wellbeing in practice. Ecosystem 
services and poverty alleviation (open access) (pp. 243–256). Routledge.
Cutter, S. L., Boruff, B. J., & Shirley, W. L. (2003). Social vulnerability to environmental hazards. Social 
science quarterly, 84(2), 242–261.
Davino, C., Gherghi, M., Sorana, S., & Vistocco, D. (2021). Measuring social vulnerability in an urban space 
through multivariate methods and models. Social indicators research, 157(3), 1179–1201.
de Leeuw, J., & Mair, P. (2009). Gifi methods for optimal scaling in R: The package homals. Journal of Sta­
tistical Software, 31(4), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v031.i04
Diamantopoulos, A., & Winklhofer, H.M. (2001). Index construction with formative indicators: An alterna­
tive to scale development. Journal of Marketing Research, 38(2), 269–277. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​5​0​9​/​j​m​k​
r​.​3​8​.​2​.​2​6​9​.​1​8​8​4​5 Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.38.2.269.18845
Dugheri, G., Grossi, G., Rocco, E., et al. (2023). Assessing the sub-urban frailties: The case of florence. Tech­
nology and data science for economic and social development. book of short papers of the asa bologna 
conference. (Vol. 35, pp. 213–218).
Fekete, A. (2009). Validation of a social vulnerability index in context to river-floods in germany. Natural 
Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 9(2), 393–403.
Ferrante, C., Ferraris, R., & Ferrante, L. (2021). Brick-by-brick inequality. Homeownership in Italy, employ­
ment instability and wealth transmission. Advances in Life Course Research, 49 , 100401, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​l​c​r​.​2​0​2​1​.​1​0​0​4​0​1​
Flanagan, B.E., Gregory, E.W., Hallisey, E.J., Heitgerd, J.L., & Lewis, B. (2011). A social vulnerability index 
for disaster management. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 8 (1), , ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​2​0​2​/​1​5​4​7​-​7​3​5​5​.​1​7​9​2​
Fleuren, B.P., van Amelsvoort, L.G., Zijlstra, F.R., de Grip, A., & Kant, I. (2018). Handling the reflective-
formative measurement conundrum: a practical illustration based on sustainable employability. Journal 
of Clinical Epidemiology, 103, 71–81. https://doi​.org/10.101​6/j.jclinep​i.2018.0​7.007. Retrieved from 
https://www​.sciencedir​ect.com/sci​ence/art​icle/pii/S0895435617311320
Freudenberg, M. (2003). Composite indicators of country performance: A critical assessment (Tech. Rep. No. 
2003/16). Paris: OECD Publishing.
Gaynor, T. S., & Wilson, M. E. (2020). Social vulnerability and equity: The disproportionate impact of covid-
19. Public administration review, 80(5), 832–838.
Gifi, A. (1990). Nonlinear multivariate analysis. New York: Wiley.
Golden, J., Conroy, R. M., Bruce, I., Denihan, A., Greene, E., Kirby, M., & Lawlor, B. A. (2009). Loneliness, 
social support networks, mood and wellbeing in communitydwelling elderly. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry: A journal of the psychiatry of late life and allied sciences, 24(7), 694–700.
Greco, S., Ishizaka, A., Tasiou, M., & Torrisi, G. (2019). On the methodological framework of composite 
indices: A review of the issues of weighting, aggregation, and robustness. Social indicators research, 
141, 61–94.
Guiso, L., & Jappelli, T. (2002). Private transfers, borrowing constraints and the timing of homeownership. 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 34(2), 315–339. https://doi.org/10.1353/mcb.2002.0040
Jacobs, R., Smith, P., Goddard, M. (2004). Measuring performance: An examination of composite perfor­
mance indicators (Tech. Rep. No. 29). York: The University of York, Centre for Health Economics.
Khan, H. (1991). Measurement and determinants of socioeconomic development: A critical conspectus. 
Social Indicators Research, 24, 153–175.
Khazanchi, R., Beiter, E. R., Gondi, S., Beckman, A. L., Bilinski, A., & Ganguli, I. (2020). County-level 
association of social vulnerability with covid-19 cases and deaths in the usa. Journal of general internal 
medicine, 35, 2784–2787.
Klopries, H., & Schwung, A. (2023). Flexible activation bag: Learning activation functions in autoencoder 
networks. 2023 ieee international conference on industrial technology (icit) (pp. 1–7).
Kotzee, I., & Reyers, B. (2016). Piloting a social-ecological index for measuring flood resilience: A compos­
ite index approach. Ecological indicators, 60, 45–53.
Kramer, M. A. (1991). Nonlinear principal component analysis using autoassociative neural networks. 
AIChE journal, 37(2), 233–243.
Krishnan, V. (2010). Constructing an area-based socioeconomic index: A principal components analysis 
approach. Edmonton, Alberta: Early Child Development Mapping Project.
Kruskal, J. B. (1964). Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: a numerical method. Psychometrika, 29(2), 
115–129.


1 3
Page 29 of 30 
28
Developing a Synthetic Socio-Economic Index through Autoencoders:…
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. nature, 521(7553), 436–444.
Lehnert, E. A., Wilt, G., Flanagan, B., & Hallisey, E. (2020). Spatial exploration of the cdc’s social vulner­
ability index and heat-related health outcomes in georgia. International journal of disaster risk reduc­
tion, 46, Article 101517.
Li, T., Zhang, H., Yuan, C., Liu, Z., & Fan, C. (2012). A pca-based method for construction of composite 
sustainability indicators. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 17, 593–603.
Linting, M., & van der Kooij, A. J. (2012). Nonlinear principal components analysis with CATPCA: A tuto­
rial. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94(1), 12–25. https://doi.org/10.1080/00223891.2011.627965
Majid, Z., Welch, C., Davies, J., & Jackson, T. (2020). Global frailty: the role of ethnicity, migration and 
socioeconomic factors. Maturitas, 139, 33–41.
Martínez, E., Rodríguez, A., Altuzarra, A., Álvarez, I. (2024). Remaking urban divides: Shifting patterns of 
neighborhood differentiation in bilbao, spain. Journal of Urban Affairs, 46(2), 389–408.
Mazziotta, M., & Pareto, A. (2013). Methods for constructing composite indices: One for all or all for one. 
Rivista Italiana di Economia Demografia e Statistica, 67(2), 67–80.
Mazziotta, M., & Pareto, A. (2018). Measuring well-being over time: The adjusted mazziotta–pareto index 
versus other non-compensatory indices. Social Indicators Research, 136, 967–976.
Mazziotta, M., & Pareto, A. (2020). Gli indici sintetici / mazziotta matteo; pareto adriano. Torino: G. Giap­
pichelli Editore.
McPhearson, T., Haase, D., Kabisch, N., & Gren, Å. (2016). Advancing understanding of the complex nature 
of urban systems. Ecological Indicators, 70, 566–573. https://doi​.org/10.101​6/j.ecolind​.2016.03​.054
Michelucci, U. (2022). An introduction to autoencoders.
Mishra, S.K. (2007). A comparative study of various inclusive indices and the index constructed by the prin­
cipal components analysis. Available at SSRN 990831.
Munda, G., & Nardo, M. (2009). Noncompensatory/nonlinear composite indicators for ranking countries: a 
defensible setting. Applied Economics, 41(12), 1513–1523.
OECD. (2008). Handbook on constructing composite indicators: methodology and user guide. Paris: OECD 
Publishing.
Pinilla, V., Ayuda, M.-I., S´aez, L.-A. (2008). Rural depopulation and the migration turnaround in mediter­
ranean western europe: a case study of aragon. Journal of Rural and Community Development, 3(1).
Reynaud, C., & Miccoli, S. (2019). Population ageing in italy after the 2008 economic crisis: A demographic 
approach. Futures, 105, 17–26.
Roh, M., & Weon, S. (2022). Living arrangement and life satisfaction of the elderly in south korea. Social 
Indicators Research, 160(2), 717–734.
Romero-Lankao, P., & Qin, H. (2011). Conceptualizing urban vulnerability to global climate and environ­
mental change. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 3(3), 142–149. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​c​o​s​u​s​t​.​2​0​1​0​.​1​2​.​0​1​6​
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning representations by back-propagating 
errors. nature, 323(6088), 533–536.
Sachs, J., Lafortune, G., Fuller, E., G.and Drumm. (2023). Implementing the sdg stimulus. sustainable devel­
opment report 2023. Dublin: Dublin University Press.
Saisana, M., & Philippas, D. (2012). Sustainable society index (ssi): Taking societies’ pulse along social, 
environmental and economic issues. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 32, 94–106.
Saukani, N., & Ismail, N. A. (2019). Identifying the components of social capital by categorical principal 
component analysis (CATPCA). Social Indicators Research, 141(2), 631–655. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​
/​s​1​1​2​0​5​-​0​1​8​-​1​8​4​2​-​2​
Scardigno, F. (2019). The cultural integration of young refugees: An experience within the italian academic 
context. Italian Journal of Sociology of Education, 11 (Italian Journal of Sociology of Education 11/3), 
283–303.
Skouby, K.E., Kivim¨aki, A., Haukiputo, L., Lynggaard, P., Windekilde, I.M. (2014). Smart cities and the 
ageing population. The 32nd meeting of wwrf (pp. 1–12).
Staveren, I.v., Webbink, E., de Haan, A., Foa, R. (2014). The last mile in analyzing wellbeing and poverty: 
Indices of social development. Forum for social economics (Vol. 43, pp. 8–26).
Steptoe, A., & Zaninotto, P. (2020). Lower socioeconomic status and the acceleration of aging: An outcome-
wide analysis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(26), 14911–14917.
Tronu, D. (2020). Le misure della vulnerabilit‘a: un’applicazione a diversi ambiti territoriali (Tech. Rep.). 
ISTAT.
UNECE (2019). Guidelines on producing leading, composite and sentiment indicators (Tech. Rep.). Geneva: 
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. Retrieved from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​u​n​e​c​e​.​o​r​g​/​s​t​a​t​i​s​t​i​c​s​/​p​u​b​l​i​c​a​t​
i​o​n​s​/​g​u​i​d​e​l​i​n​e​s​-​p​r​o​d​u​c​i​n​g​l​e​a​d​i​n​g​-​c​o​m​p​o​s​i​t​e​-​a​n​d​-​s​e​n​t​i​m​e​n​t​-​i​n​d​i​c​a​t​o​r​s​


1 3
28 
Page 30 of 30
G. Grossi, E. Rocco
van der Burg, E., de Leeuw, J., & Verdegaal, R. (1988). Homogeneity analysis with k sets of variables: An 
alternating least squares method with optimal scaling features. Psychometrika, 53(2), 177–197. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​B​F​0​2​2​9​4​1​3​1​
Vendemmia, B., Pucci, P., Beria, P. (2021). An institutional periphery in discussion. rethinking the inner areas 
in italy. Applied geography, 135, 102537.
Victor, C., Scambler, S., Bond, J., & Bowling, A. (2000). Being alone in later life: loneliness, social isolation 
and living alone. Reviews in clinical gerontology, 10(4), 407–417.
von Szombathely, M., Hanf, F. S., Bareis, J., Meier, L., & Oßenbrügge, J., Pohl, T. (2023). An index-based 
approach to assess social vulnerability for hamburg, germany. International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Science, 14(5), 782–794.
Yu, C.-Y., Woo, A., Emrich, C. T., & Wang, B. (2020). Social vulnerability index and obesity: an empirical 
study in the us. Cities, 97, Article 102531.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
