 
 Financial Stability  
Institute 
  FSI Insights 
on policy implementation 
No 42 
 
 
Diversity and inclusion – 
embracing the true colours 
in financial supervision 
By Nompumelelo Simelane and Jeffery Yong 
 
 
May 2022 
  
JEL classification: G20, G28, G30, G38 
 
Keywords: Corporate governance, conduct of business, 
disclosure, diversity and inclusion 
  
 
 
FSI Insights are written by members of the Financial Stability Institute (FSI) of the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS), often in collaboration with staff from supervisory agencies and central banks. The papers 
aim to contribute to international discussions on a range of contemporary regulatory and supervisory 
policy issues and implementation challenges faced by financial se ctor authorities. The views expressed in 
them are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the BIS or the Basel- based 
committees. 
Authorised by the Chair of the FSI, Fernando Restoy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This publication is available  on the BIS website ( www.bis.org). To contact the BIS Media and Public 
Relations team, please email press@bis.org. You can sign up for email alerts at 
www.bis.org/emailalerts.htm. 
 
 
 
© Bank for International Settlements 2022. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be reproduced or 
translated provided the source is stated. 
 
 
 
 
ISSN 2522-249X (online) 
ISBN 978-92-9259-561-6 (online) 
 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision iii 
 
 
Contents 
Executive summary ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
Section 1 – Introduction ................................................................................................................................................................. 6 
Section 2 – Conceptual background of D&I and its prudential relevance ................................................................. 7 
Section 3 – Governing legislation ............................................................................................................................................. 12 
Section 4 – Corporate governance ........................................................................................................................................... 15 
Suitability assessments .................................................................................................................................................................. 16 
Board composition ................................................................................................................................................................ 16 
Other governance-related requirements ...................................................................................................................... 17 
Supervisory reviews ............................................................................................................................................................... 17 
Gender diversity ...................................................................................................................................................................... 18 
Section 5 – Conduct of business ............................................................................................................................................... 21 
Section 6 – Disclosure.................................................................................................................................................................... 23 
Section 7 – Proportionate application of D&I regulatory approaches ...................................................................... 25 
Section 8 – Concluding remarks ................................................................................................................................................ 25 
References .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 27 
 
 
  
 
4 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial 
supervision1 
Executive summary 
In the financial sector , “diversity” often refers to having staff or customers with different 
dimensions such as gender, ethnici ty, sexual orientation, age , social background  and physical  or 
mental ability, while “inclusion” means valuing and accepting people for who they are and 
providing them with equal and fair opportunities.  Diversity and inclusion (D&I) can be considered 
internally in a financial institution in terms of the composition of its board of directors, management and 
staff members, or externally in terms of its dealings with customers and the public. One of the main focus 
of diversity has been on gender, but the scope is expanding to cover other diversity dimensions, including 
age, disability, race and ethnicity. 
Sound D&I practices by financial institutions can support the core prudential objective of 
promoting the safety and soundness of the financial sector. D&I can support prudential objectives by 
improving the quality of corporate governance of regulated financial institution s. It is observed that a 
commonly desired regulatory outcome of D&I is to avoid groupthink by including people with  different 
lived experiences at all levels within a financial institution.  Diverse teams that are inclusive  also perform 
better because they are more likely to re- examine facts, encourage greater scrutiny, become more aware 
of bias and minimise the risk of blindness to information. In addition, in promoting the fair and equitable 
treatment of customers, D&I requirements contribute to the mitigation of reputational and legal risks. 
Therefore, even without a specific mandate to advance the D&I agenda, prudential supervisors may 
introduce D&I requirements to achieve their fundamental safety and soundness objectives.  
Overarching legislation on social justice typically underpins specific regulatory instruments 
that elaborate how laws related to D&I are to be implemented in the financial s ector. This is unlike 
other areas of prudential supervision in which regulatory requirements or guidance are issued on the basis 
of legal powers accorded to a prudential supervisor under relevant financial sector supervisory legislation. 
The underlying leg islation provides the force of law from different angles, ranging from the public 
accountability of financial sector regulators to D&I objectives to financial sector-specific requirements . 
Nonetheless, there are conduct and prudential justifications for regulatory interest in D&I, as set out above. 
D&I regulatory approaches vary significantly across jurisdictions. In certain jurisdictions, the 
emphasis is very much on the diversity of decision-makers within firms in order to promote sound business 
strategies. In other jurisdictions, the focus is on advancing broader social justice policies aimed at the 
inclusion of underrepresented groups of the population in the workforce. In addition, some jurisdictions 
focus mainly on customer -related issues from the pers pective of the accessibility of financial services. It 
might be worthwhile for financial regulators to consider consolidating these disparate regulatory 
issuances, to have a coherent regulatory framework covering all D&I aspects that matter for financial 
institutions. Firms themselves would benefit from such a holistic approach to D&I. 
International regulatory standards call for banks to establish  a sound corporate 
governance framework that is underpinned by well qualified board members not only individually 
but also collectively.  Some regulators implement these standards from a broader diversity perspective, 
for example, by requiring diversity of board members in terms of an underrepresented gender. One of the 
 
1  By Nompumelelo Simelane , Central Bank of Eswatini ( nompumelelos@centralbank.org.sz); and Jeffery Yong, Bank for 
International Settlements (jeffery.yong@bis.org). The authors are grateful to Varshaa Kutik and Ruth Walters for their valuable 
input on this paper and to Esther Künzi for administrative support. 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 5 
 
 
main regulatory objectives relevant  to D&I is for boards of directors as a whole to possess “ collective 
suitability”, which can be measured from various diversity perspectives, including gender and ethnicity. In 
practice, D&I regulations aiming to achieve this objective establish minimum re quirements on suitability 
assessments, board composition , succession planning , and remuneration and recruitment practices . To 
make further progress in this area, supervisory review processes  need to embed such requirements in 
order to facilitate proper implementation. 
From a conduct of business perspective, unfair business practices typically impact the 
“inclusion” more than  the “diversity” of customers. Financial consumers have the right, as in any 
consumer relationship, to equitable and dignified treatment conditions. Discriminatory and exclusionary 
business practices can have prudential implications for firms, for example through reputational risk, 
lawsuits or regulatory fines. As such, sound D&I conduct by firms is not only relevant for authorities with 
a conduct of business mandate, but also for prudential authorities more generally. 
Market discipline is another key component t hat fosters sound D&I practices. Accordingly, 
D&I regulation often requires banks to disclose their  D&I policies or strategies, the objectives of those 
policies and the measurement of progress.  Indeed, m ajor financial institutions , especially listed firms,  
typically publicly disclose their internal D&I policies, initia tives and in some cases, targets. Disclosure of 
the appointment of members of the board of directors is particularly important to support the overarching 
D&I objective of diversity of thought (or cognitive diversity) for better decision -making. However, it is 
uncommon to find disclosure of customer-related D&I policies. 
While there has been noticeable progress in improving firms’ D&I, especially in the area of 
gender, the pace needs to accelerate and the scope to be broadened to other dimensions. 
Specifically, a gender -balanced target for boards of directors, senior management and firms as a whole 
remains elusive. The gender pay gap has not narrowed, partly due to men holding more higher-paid senior 
level positions in firms. Other areas of diversity should also be considered – including age, ethnicity, sexual 
orientation and socio -economic background , amongst others  – to promote diversity of thought and , 
ultimately, the financial safety and soundness of firms. Nevertheless, it should be recognised that some 
cultural and societal issues, which go beyond the regulatory remit, need to be addressed first before any 
meaningful change can be introduced in the financial sector. 
International standards and guidance on D &I might be helpful to prompt progress in 
improving the quality of corporate governance of regulated financial institutions, thus enhancing 
the safety and soundness of firms , and of the financial sector. While existing international standards 
and guidance do cover corporate governance from a diversity angle, they could be more explicit in 
articulating expectations on D&I more specifically. Financial sector supervisors would benefit from clear 
guidance on the extent of their regulatory remit s in promoting D& I in support of their core prudential 
objectives. Nevertheless, it should also be acknowledged that D&I is not a silver bullet to address corporate 
governance deficiencies in firms.  In other words, D&I is a necessary but not a sufficient condition to 
promote sound corporate governance practices.  
  
  
 
6 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
Section 1 – Introduction 
1. Since the dawn of time, humans have lived and developed in groups . These groups can be 
defined in different ways – geographically, biologically, demographically, economically  etc. We are used 
to putting people into different boxes according to those dimensions, for example, west/east, male/female, 
black/white, poor/rich, old/young or non-disabled/disabled. This is, to a certain extent, understandable 
given the visible traits of such characterisations. Yet, increasingly, many parts of society reject such an 
over-simplified, binary way of thinking and the negative consequences it entails in terms of stereotyping , 
discrimination, exclusion and bias.  
2. Many societies today are a melting po t of people from different backgrounds, culture s, 
ethnicities, political ideologies, ways of thinking, religious beliefs and nationalities, amongst other 
dimensions. Societal norms are being redefined, for example, the role of women, “traditional” family units 
and gender identit ies, to name a few. Recent tragic high -profile racial discrimination cases 2 have 
galvanised global movements and put diversity and inclusion (D&I ) under an intense media spotlight. As 
a result, there are growing societal expectation s and pressure s on industries, including the financial 
services industry, to act on D&I issues.  In broad terms, “ diversity” is generally understood to mean 
reflecting the broader societal make-up, while “inclusion” means accepting people for their true selves and 
being given a “seat at the table”.  
3. D&I is not a new issue in the financial sector.  Traditionally, financial supervisory frameworks 
view D&I mainly from the perspective of the suitability of persons. A clas sic example is  regulatory 
requirements for financial institutions to appoint diverse  memberships of boards of directors in terms of 
gender, professional background, knowledge and skills etc. The prudential aim of such requirements is to 
establish checks and balances by avoiding groupthink so that decisions taken and strategies pursued are 
in line with a firm’s interest and not that of any particular dominant individuals. Increasingly, D&I is being 
considered in a more explicit and holistic manner by financial supervisors ,3 covering aspects beyond 
corporate governance such as conduct of business and disclosure requirements.  
4. From a private sector perspective, financial institutions are paying greater attention t o 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) is sues. Shareholders and customers expect financial 
institutions to observe high ESG standards. Failure to do so can expose firms to significant reputational 
risk. This could explain why, even without specific D&I international regulatory standards or explicit 
jurisdictional regulatory requirements, many financial institutions have taken steps to improve their ESG 
practices. Increasing regulatory scrutiny  on climate and environmental issues  (the “E” of ESG 4) is also 
attracting greater supervisory attention to governance (the “G” issues) including D&I matters.  
5. In this paper, we examine emerging regulatory approaches 5 to the D&I practices of 
financial institutions. Through desktop reviews and surveys covering six6 financial regulatory authorities, 
we outline the range of D&I regulatory practices. In Section 2, we explain what D&I means and why it is a 
 
2  For example, the murder of George Floyd that prompted the global Black Lives Matter movement.  
3  In this paper, the terms “regulation” and “supervision”; and “regulators” and “supervisors” are used interchangeably.  
4  Ehlers et al (2022) outlines how the “S” and “G” components cover D&I of a firm. Conceptually, this means that financial 
regulators can review the “S” and “G” components of ESG scores as one source of input in assessing firms’ diversity and inclusion 
practices. However, the study found that currently, ESG ratings should be used with caution as they lack transparency in terms 
of the underlying rating methodologies. The ratings may provide inconsistent and divergent results and are open to con flicts 
of interests on the part of the ESG ratings business.  
5  This paper is not focused on financial inclusion issues. Rather, it covers financial inclusion from a narrow perspective of inclusive 
customer policies that firms may adopt or regulators may require.  
6  We would like to thank colleagues from the Central Bank of Argentina, Bank of England, European Central Bank, Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority, South African Reserve Bank and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, United States for providing 
input for the paper. 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 7 
 
 
prudential issue. Section 3 outlines the form of the enabling legislation that underlies regulatory action in 
this area. Sections 4 to 6 explain  the substance of D&I regulatory approaches, covering corporate 
governance, conduct of business and disclosure aspects , respectively. Se ction 7 briefly explains how 
proportionate D&I requirements can be put in place and Section 8 concludes.  
Section 2 – Conceptual background of D&I and its prudential relevance 
6.  “Diversity” in the context of financial institutions  can be defined as having board 
members, employees or customers with  different dimensions such as  gender, educational 
background, ethnicity, sexual orientation , age  and physical ability , while “inclusion” means 
accepting people for who they are and providing equal and fair opportunities for them. Concretely, 
a manifestation of “ diversity” within a financial institution is to have a workforce that reflects a society’s 
composition. “Inclusion”, on the other hand, means all employees can bring their “ whole selves” to work 
without hiding any aspects of their personal background , although this may be regarded as unrealistic in 
practice. An alternative formulation of “ inclusion” is for all employees to have acces s to physical and 
psychological safe sp aces so that they are able to contribute their full potential.  In terms of a firm’s 
customer base, diversity means acknowledging the different profiles of its customers and striving to cater 
to their financial needs. To be inclusive, firms need to avoid business processes (for example underwriting 
or pricing) that could exclude certain segments of society or treat certain demographics unfairly due to 
their personal traits. Figure 1 provides non-exhaustive examples to d escribe how D&I manifests within a 
financial institution’s organisational structure and, externally, in their interactions with customers. 
Figure 1: Illustration of manifestation of D&I touchpoints of a financial institution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. In some regulatory frameworks, in addition to “ diversity” and “inclusion”, “equity” or 
“equality” are explicitly considered, expanding the acronym to “DE&I”.  These concepts are not 
mutually exclusive or independent. “Equity” and “equality” can be viewed as the desirable outcomes of 
D&I. Equity is generally understood to mean treat ing people fairly , recognising the ir different personal 
circumstances. Equality implies treating people in the same way, which does not necessarily result in equity 
given the different situations people can be in  and the different starting points . While there are benefits 
 
Dimensions 
• Gender 
• Sexual orientation 
• Ethnicity/race/religion 
• Disability 
• Age 
• Educational/ 
professional 
background 
• Political beliefs 
• Language 
• Geographical location 
• Social 
status/background 
• Wealth/income 
 
 
Diversity 
Inclusion 
Internal manifestation within firms 
• Board membership composition 
• Gender target for senior managers 
• Recognition of same-sex unions in 
compensation packages 
• Accessibility of office space and 
equipment 
• Turnover rates of staff 
  
External manifestation – dealings with 
customers 
• Advertisements using diverse sets of 
people or types of family units 
• Non-discriminatory underwriting 
criteria 
• Accessibility of products and services 
  
 
8 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
to explicitly mentioning the “E” when discussing D&I issues, for simplicity this paper considers “equity” as 
being included in the concept of D&I.  
8. There is currently no globally accepted definition of “ diversity” and “inclusion” in the 
context of financial sector supervision.  Table 1 highlights definitions  stated in or  implied by the 
documents reviewed. 
Definitions of diversity and inclusion in different jurisdictions Table 1 
Jurisdiction Diversity Inclusion 
Argentina7 Promotion of inclusive and diverse work environments in terms of gender, geographic origin, age, 
ethnic profile, professional experience, family composition and caregiving responsibilities. 
Republic of Ireland8 Diversity refers to the existence and acceptance of 
differences between people in whatever form they 
take. 
Inclusion is about helping people feel 
involved and valued regardless of their 
difference and making the best use of 
diverse talent. 
European Union9 Diversity means the situation whereby the 
characteristics of the members of the 
management body – including their ages, genders, 
geographical provenances, and educational and 
professional backgrounds – are different to an 
extent that allows a variety of views within the 
management body. 
- 
Hong Kong SAR - Financial inclusion refers to efforts to 
remove barriers that hinder access to basic 
banking services and to promote access to 
basic banking services by different 
segments of the society to meet the basic 
daily needs of the public and the 
operational needs of legitimate businesses. 
South Africa10 Diversity should be understood as the varied 
perspectives and approaches offered by members 
of different identity groups. For the purposes of 
the King Code on Corporate Governance for South 
Africa, it includes diversity in the field of 
knowledge, skills and experience in addition to 
age, culture, race and gender. 
- 
United Kingdom11 Diversity of thought means bringing together a 
range of different styles of thinking among 
members of a group. Factors that could lead to 
diverse thinking could include, but are not limited 
to, different perspectives, abilities, knowledge, 
attitudes, information styles and demographic 
characteristics, or any combination of these. 
Inclusion means that everyone feels 
involved, valued, respected and treated 
fairly, and that these elements are 
embedded into a firm’s culture. Inclusion 
can be defined as the practice or policy of 
providing equal access to opportunities and 
resources for people who might otherwise 
be excluded or marginalised, for example 
due to demographic characteristics. 
  
 
7  See Central Bank of Argentina (2020a). 
8  See Central Bank of Ireland (2020). 
9  See European Union (2013b).  
10  See Institute of Directors Southern Africa (2016) for King IV Code, an industry code of governance for listed companies. 
11  See Bank of England and Financial Conduct Authority (2021). 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 9 
 
 
United States12 Diversity is defined as “minorities and women” 
where “minorities” are defined as Black Americans, 
Native Americans, Hispanic Americans and Asian 
Americans. Regulated financial institutions can 
adopt a broader definition to include people with 
disabilities, veterans, LGBTQI+ (lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex). 
Inclusion is a process to create and 
maintain a positive work environment that 
values individual similarities and 
differences, so that all can reach their 
potential and maximise their contributions 
to an organisation. 
Source: FSI staff. 
 
9. The main focus of diversity has been on gender, but the scope is expanding to cover other 
diversity dimensions.  In some cases, specific dimensions of “ diversity” are defined in overarching 
legislation, for example the Equality Act 2010 that applies in Great Britain  sets out “protected 
characteristics” for the purposes of anti -discrimination law.13  In other cases, the definitions of “diversity” 
and “inclusion” are context-specific, such as in the financial regulatory standards in the United States , as 
shown in Table 1 above. In South Africa, the ethnicity dimension is emphasised. Republic of South Africa 
(2004) defines “broad-based black economic empowerment” to mean the economic empowerment of all 
black people including women, workers, youth, people with disabilities and people living in rural areas . It 
sets out a number of other objectives including  achieving equitable representation in all occupational 
categories and levels in the workforce.  Table 2 shows the range of diversity dimensions covered or 
mentioned in the different regulatory frameworks or consultation papers. 
Dimensions of diversity and inclusion covered in the different jurisdictions Table 2 
 Gender Age Ethnicity/ 
race/religion 
Sexual 
orientation Disability 
Educational/ 
professional 
background 
Others 
Argentina       
Geographic origin, 
nationality, family 
composition, caring 
responsibilities, 
ideology, political or 
trade union opinion, 
economic status. 
European Union        Geographical 
provenance. 
Hong Kong SAR       
Marital status, 
pregnancy, 
breastfeeding, family 
status.  
South Africa        
United Kingdom14        
United States        
Source: FSI staff. 
10. Sound D&I practices by financial institutions can support the core prudential objective of 
promoting the safety and soundness of the financial sector. One way in which D&I can support 
prudential objectives is by improving the  quality of corporate governanc e of a regulated financial 
 
12  See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency et al (2015). These standards were issued under section 342(g)(3) of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. 
13  See definition of “protected characteristics” from the Human Rights Commission. 
14  Based on the Equality Act 2010 – see United Kingdom (2010). A broader set of characteristics were considered in the discussion 
paper published by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority.  
  
 
10 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
institution. It is observed that a common desired regulatory outcome of D&I is to avoid groupthink at all 
levels within a financial institution.  European Central Bank (2021 a,b) describe how diversity in leadership 
can improve the corporate governance of financial institutions  through effective challeng ing, better 
decision-making and minimisation of potential conflicts of interest. This idea is enshrined in legislation, as 
in European Union (2013a), that states that a lack of diversity can lead to groupthink, which can result in a 
lack of monitoring of management decisions by management bodies.  Visco (2021) and European Central 
Bank (2021b)  added that diversity can also minimise concentrations of power within a firm  and avoid 
decision-making by dominant personalities. Central Bank of Ireland (2018) further elaborated that D&I can 
reduce overconfidence by decision-makers, improve risk management and reduce excessive resistance to 
external challenges. From a supervisory perspective, the Central Bank of Ireland (2018) found that a lack 
of D&I at the board and senior management levels of a financial institution is a leading indicator of 
heightened behaviour and culture risks. Haldane (2016) attributed most bank failures in the Great Financial 
Crisis to groupthink that was brought about by lack of diversity within those firms. Besides corporate 
governance, D&I can contribute to better conduct relating to business practices, for example through 
reduced reputational and legal risk exposures, which in turn support prudential objectives. D&I disclosure, 
for example on the gender compositions of boards, can also reinforce prudential objectives through the 
self-accountability of firms.  
11. Nevertheless, pure D&I obj ectives may sometimes conflict with other prudential 
objectives. In particular, c ertain suitability of person requirements could inhibit progress in D&I within 
firms. For example, European Central Bank ( 2021b) highlighted  that requirements regarding minimum 
levels of experience may make it difficult for positions to be filled by women. This can be the case due to 
prolonged absence from work due to childbirth and caregiving responsibilities. As such, there could be 
cases in which D&I objectives cannot be achieved because of other competing fit and proper assessment  
criteria. It is challenging for supervisors to balance such trade-offs. Having a clear regulatory statement on 
such trade-offs can be helpful for firms. For example, European Banking Authority and European Securities 
and Markets Authority (20 21) states institutions should not recruit members of the management body 
with the sole purpose of increasing diversity to the detriment of the functioning and suitability of the 
management body collectively, or at the expense of the suitability of individual members o f the 
management body . Ultimately, the litmus test is to assess whether an individual contributes  to the 
collective suitability of the board as a whole. 
12. From a business perspective, studies have found that firms with more diverse workforce s 
tend to have be tter financial performance.  Garcia-Meca et al (2015) outlined empirical evidence from 
a study of over 150 bank s in  nine countries showing that gender diversity tends to increase the  
performance of banks. Conceptually, checks and balances that are in place through constructive challenges 
to business decisions , together with strategies devised by decision -makers who come from diverse 
backgrounds, should lower operational and reputational risks, thus improving financial performance. It is 
reasonable to expect that a more diverse and inclusive firm should be able to generate more stable and 
sustainable returns and be able to adapt its business model  to better cope with changes in its business 
environment. The World Economic Forum 15 found that diverse and inclusive workforce s can increase 
innovation and economic competitiveness. Nevertheless, there are countervailing studies that have found 
that diverse boards can “ backfire” by increasing the number of unproductive conflicts . Indeed this could 
negate the whole purpose of D&I. Figure 2 summarises how good D&I practices can support prudential 
objectives. 
 
15  See World Economic Forum (2019). World Economic Forum (2020b) states that improving diversity, equity and inclusion across 
the entire innovation chain will be fundamental to broadening the pool of potential talent, improving the capacity of new 
solutions to reflect the needs of society and making sure that all segments of society participate fairly in the economic benefits 
generated through innovation. 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 11 
 
 
Figure 2: Prudential relevance of sound D&I policies and practices by financial institutions 
 
13. Some financial regulatory agencies may have specific mandates to promote D&I. Kirakul et 
al (2021) found that supervisory authorities that are also central banks tend to have broader developmental 
mandates than standalone prudential authorities. Such  mandates may include financial sector 
development and financial inclusion, which may prompt those authorities to take a more proactive role in 
promoting a n inclusive financial sector for underserved segments of the p opulation. In Argentina, the 
central bank, which is also the prudential authority, has a mandate 16 to promote economic development 
with social equality  – a key objective of D&I measures. In  May 2020, the central bank created a specific 
Department for the Promotion of Gender Policies, Respect and Workplace Coexistence, with the aim of 
promoting, developing and implementing policies to support the preservation of gender rights, diversity 
and equality within the organisation and the financial system in general. 
14. Some regulatory standards on D&I seem to go beyond prudential objectives, to address 
other market developmental and  socio-political objectives.  In the United States ,17 financial 
regulators18 encourage regulated fir ms to assess whether their  supplier diversity polic ies provide fair 
opportunities for minority -owned and women- owned businesses. Other regulators with market 
development, financial inclusion and competition objectives may also introduce regulatory requirem ents 
on D&I to support these objectives. In particular, with some regulators increasingly focused on promoting 
innovation in the financial sector ,19 improving D&I in financial institutions can directly contribute to this 
broader mandate by breaking silo or  historical inertia, and encouraging experimentation with new ideas. 
In South Africa, the Prudential Authority collaborates with the Competition Commission in order to grant 
approvals for certain transactions involving financial institutions, such as merge rs and acquisitions. This 
collaboration aims to achieve several policy objective s including promoting employment and advanc ing 
the social and economic welfare of South Africans; ensur ing that small- and medium-sized enterprises 
 
16  See www.bcra.gob.ar/Institucional/BCRALaw.asp. 
17  See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency et al (2015). 
18  The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission. 
19  Kirakul et al (2021) lays out selected financial regulatory authorities with fintech and innovation mandates. 
Diversity and inclusion
Improve diversity of 
thought (avoid groupthink)
Positive challenge
Speaking up
Fairer treatment of 
customers
Enhanced internal 
governance
Better decision-making
Improved risk 
management
Better culture
Reduced reputational and 
legal risks
Support safety and 
soundness of firms
Greater innovation and 
better products
Sustainable growth
Financial stability
  
 
12 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
have equitable opportunities to participate in the economy; and promoting a greater spread of ownership, 
in particular to increase the ownership stakes of historically disadvantaged persons.  
Section 3 – Governing legislation 
15. In the sampled jurisdictions, overarching legislation on social justice typically underpins 
specific regulatory instruments that elaborate how laws related to D&I are to be implemented in 
the financial sector. This is probably because D&I issues  are not specific to the financial sector but cut 
across different industries and the competencies of different public sector authorities. Having a legislative 
foundation to support financial regulatory actions on D&I is important in order to provide regul atory 
requirements or expectations  with the force of law. A lack of explicit legislation or clear D&I regulatory 
communications, such as supervisory expectations, may hinder progress in this area. Without the force of 
law, it is difficult for supervisors t o take action against firms that are found to have gaps in their D&I 
policies and practices. In addition, a lack of awareness or understanding within supervisory authorities of 
the prudential relevance of D&I can be a challenge. Table 3 shows the range of legislation that support 
regulatory approaches on D&I in selected jurisdictions.  
  
List of legislation underpinning D&I regulatory issuances  Table 3 
Jurisdiction Legislation Coverage of legislation on D&I issues 
Argentina  Law No 23.592 (1988): Anti-
discriminatory practices 
Law No 5261 (2015): Law against 
discrimination 
Laws No 26.485 (2009) and No 27.533 
(2019): Comprehensive Women's 
Protection Act 
Law No 26.743 (2012): Gender Identity 
 
Law No 24.240: Consumer Defence 
Enshrines fundamental rights and guarantees, as 
recognised in the National Constitution. 
Guarantees and promotes the principle of equality and 
prevents discrimination through inclusive public policies. 
Contains legal provisions to prevent, prosecute and 
eradicate violence against women. 
 
Allows transgender people to be registered in personal 
documents with the name and gender of their choice. 
Sets out standards to preserve respect for consumer 
rights. It requires companies to respect consumers’ rights 
to protection and safety, education, decent treatment and 
to provide offers and advertising and that are relevant to 
the economic interests of the consumer. 
European Union Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union 
 
Directive 2019/878 
 
 
Directive 2013/36/EU 
 
 
 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 
 
National laws of member states 
Sets out overarching aim to eliminate inequalities, and to 
promote equality between men and women including in 
the labour market and treatment at work. 
Requires firms to observe gender neutral remuneration 
policies and sets out the role of competent authorities in 
issuing guidelines.  
Sets out governance-related requirements on firms and 
establishes the role of competent authorities. Requires 
institutions to have diversity policies in place, including 
targets for the representation of the “underrepresented 
gender” in the management bodies. 
Requires institutions to disclose information regarding 
their policy and targets on diversity. 
Includes governance and diversity related requirements in 
line with the abovementioned European Union legal 
framework. 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 13 
 
 
Hong Kong SAR Sex Discrimination Ordinance 
 
 
 
Disability Discrimination Ordinance 
 
 
Family Status Discrimination Ordinance 
 
 
 
Race Discrimination Ordinance 
Prohibits discrimination against a person on grounds of 
sex, marital status, pregnancy or breastfeeding, in 
prescribed activities including employment and the 
provision of services. 
Outlaws certain acts that discriminate against a person on 
the basis of disability in relation to prescribed activities 
including employment and provision of services. 
Prohibits discrimination against a person on the grounds 
on grounds of “family status", defined as having a 
responsibility for the care of an immediate family member 
in relation to prescribed activities including employment 
and the provision of services. 
Protects people against discrimination, harassment and 
vilification in relation to prescribed activities, including 
employment and the provision of services, on the basis of 
their race. This includes the colour, descent, and national 
or ethnic origin of a person. 
South Africa Broad-based Black Economic 
Empowerment Act 53 of 2003  
 
 
 
 
 
Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998 
 
 
 
 
 
Insurance Act 18 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
Financial Sector Regulation Act 9 of 
2019  
Commits parties including financial authorities to actively 
promote a globally competitive financial sector that 
reflects the demographics of South Africa, and contribute 
to the establishment of an equitable society by effectively 
providing accessible financial services to black people and 
by directing investment into targeted sectors of the 
economy. 
Promotes equal opportunity and fair treatment in 
employment by eliminating unfair discrimination and 
implementation of affirmative action measures to redress 
the disadvantages in employment experienced by 
different groups in order to ensure equitable 
representation in all occupational categories and levels in 
the workforce. 
Specifies that one of the objectives of insurance 
supervision is to promote broad-based transformation of 
the insurance sector as envisaged under the Broad-based 
Black Economic Empowerment Act. Requires a licensee to 
have a plan to meet its stated commitments in terms of 
transformation in the aforementioned Act. 
Sets transformation of the financial sector as envisaged 
under the Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment Act 
as one of the objectives for financial regulators in South 
Africa.  
United Kingdom Equality Act 2010 
 
 
 
 
Sets out “protected characteristics” and the law on equal 
pay. Places public sector equality duty on financial 
authorities when making decisions and setting policies. 
Sets out objectives to eliminate discrimination, advance 
equality of opportunity and foster good relations among 
different groups of people. 
United States Dodd-Frank Act Establishes an Office of Minority and Women Inclusion 
(OMWI) within each of several agencies to be responsible 
for all of the agency’s matters relating to diversity in 
management, employment and business activities. 
Requires the OMWI director of each agency to develop 
standards for assessing the diversity policies and practices 
of entities regulated by the agency. 
Source: FSI staff. 
  
 
14 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
16. The underlying legislation provides the force of law from different angles , ranging from 
public accountability of financial sector regulators in relation to D&I objectives, to financial sector- 
specific requirements.20  For example, in the United Kingdom, the P rudential Regulation Authority and 
the Financial Conduct Authority are subject to the public sector equality duty21 that sets out how these 
authorities need to fulfil D&I objectives when exercising their functions . In Hong Kong  SAR, the general 
legislation on sex and disability discrimination, while not specifically targeted at the financial services 
sector, has been transposed into  provisions in the industry code for banking institutions in Hong Kong  
SAR (the Code of Banking Practice). In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act puts in place an accountability 
mechanism through the establishment of the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion in each of several 
financial sector regulators . The offices are  required to provide an annual report to the U nited States 
Congress on actions taken by the relevant financial sector regulators 22 with respect to D&I requirements. 
Unlike these jurisdictions, the European Union has specific legislative requirements in the capital rules, for 
financial institutions to have diverse management bodies. In particular, European Union (2013a) empowers 
the European Banking Authority to issue guidelines on diversity and  requires the authority  to regularly 
report to the European Commission on the outcomes of its benchmarking studies 23 of gender diversity 
practices of banks in the European Union. 
17. Financial authorities typically need to collaborate with other government and public sector 
agencies in introducing D&I requirements in the financial sector.  For example, in Argentina, the 
Central Bank of Argentina and the Ministry of Women, Gender and  Diversity established a Promotion of 
Gender Policies, Respect and Appropriate Workplace Behavio ur Management Office to contribute to the 
removal of gender inequality within the central bank  and in the broader financial system. The Ministry of 
Women, Gender  and Diversity  is responsible for the  overall design, implementation and evaluation of 
national public policies on gender, equality and diversity.  The central bank also collaborates with the  
National Securities Commission and the Ministry of Economy  to develo p a Financial Education 
Programme24 with a gender perspective aimed at different audiences, and with the objective of promoting 
social inclusion.  In some jurisdictions such as  Hong Kong  SAR, South Africa and the United Kingdom, 
industry-led codes of conduct specify D&I-related expectations for firms. To support regulatory guidelines 
on D&I in Hong Kong  SAR, the banking industry provides implementation details in the form of specific 
industry codes of conduct and guidelines.25  In Hong Kong  SAR, the Equal Opportunities Commission is 
responsible for the enforcement of the four anti-discrimination laws that also apply to the financial sector. 
The Institute of Directors in Southern Africa established the King Code on Corporate Governance for South 
Africa that requires governing bodies of firms to set targets for race and gender representation in its 
membership, amongst other D&I requirements.  Regulators in the United Kingdom collaborate with 
government departments such as HM Treasury, Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
and the Government Equalities Office on D&I issues. In addition, the regulators also work with the Equality 
 
20  Some regulatory frameworks are becoming more explicitly inclusive in terms of language used in regulatory issuances . For 
example, in the United Kingdom, the Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Aut hority have reviewed their 
policy documents to ensure more inclusive language and will continue doing so for new policies. In Hong Kong  SAR, the 
supervisory manual defines “he/his” as covering all genders including neuter genders. 
21  The public sector equality duty requires public authorities in the United Kingdom to have due regard to the need to achieve 
the objectives under the Equality Act 2010 including eliminating discrimination and advancing equality of opportunity for 
various groups of people. For more information see www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-sector-equality-duty.  
22  These include Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; each of the Federal 
reserve banks; Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; National Credit Union Administration; Bureau of Consumer Financial 
Protection; the Securities and Exchange Commission;  the Departmental Offices of the Department of the Treasury ; and the 
Federal Housing Finance Agency. 
23  See here for the visualisation tool of the benchmarking study conducted in 2019.  
24  See www.bcra.gov.ar/BCRAyVos/Programas-Educacion-Financiera-bcra.asp.  
25  See the Hong Kong Association of Banks (2018), (2020) and (2021). 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 15 
 
 
and Human Rights Commission26 in the discharge of their public sector equality duty and with the Financial 
Reporting Council on D&I disclosures for listed firms.  
Section 4 – Corporate governance 
18. International regulatory standards call for banks to establish a sound corporate 
governance framework that is underpinned by well qualified board members not only individually 
but also collectively. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015) includes a requirement that the 
board of directors of a bank comprise individuals with a balance of skills, diversity and expertise . Board 
members should collectively possess the necessary qualifications commensurate with the size, complexity 
and risk profile of the bank.  The principles introduce the concept of  collective suitability of the board,  
whereby board members as a whole should possess a range of knowledge and experience and have varied 
backgrounds to promote a diversity of views. Although the international guidelines describe diversity of 
thought mainly from the perspective of knowledge and expertise, some regulatory authorities have taken 
a broader view to deal with other dimensions of diversity, including gender (see Table 2). 
19. In the area of corporate governance, D&I regulations cover four  main aspects – suitability 
assessments, board composition, remuneration and recruitment practices . The main prudential 
objective of promoting diversity within a firm is to encourage constructive challenge s and avoid 
groupthink, thus contributing to sound business decisions. Table 4  provides a summary of the range of 
D&I aspects in publicly available regulatory requirements in selected jurisdictions.  
20. Supervisors can adapt existing corporate governance requirements to cover D&I issues . In 
other words, regulators may already have the relevant corporate governance-related requirements in place 
that can be applied in the context of D&I. For example, Central Bank of Argentina (2020a)  adjusts the 
existing guidelines on corporate governance to cover gender equity in managerial positions, staff training, 
the promotion of inclusive and gender -diverse workplaces, as well as gender  equitable management  
frameworks. Uniquely, it considers it good practice for financial institutions to use a gender parity criterion 
in determining the composition of the audit committee . The regulatory approach in the United Kingdom 
also places many of the D&I policies in the context of corporate governance and effective decision-making. 
 
26  Equality and Human Rights Commission (2019 ) outlines its Gender Equality Duty C ode of P ractice that states that “a public 
authority may have functions which have the potential to address the gender pay gap in a wider policy sense”, and if so, “the 
public authority should also be considering whether it can address the causes of the gender pay gap within that wider remit 
where appropriate.” 
Overview of D&I-related governance standards or issuances Table 4 
Jurisdiction Suitability Board composition Remuneration Recruitment 
Argentina      
European Union     
South Africa     
United Kingdom     
United States     
Source: FSI staff. 
  
 
16 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
Suitability assessments 
21. As boards of directors are the main decision -making bodies within financial institutions, 
they can have a profound impact on the financial performance and soundness of those firms.  
European Central Bank (2021b) emphasises the importance of diversity amongst board members in 
achieving the “independence of mind” criterion, which it considers critical in safeguarding a firm’s safety 
and soundness , and in promoting public trust in the institution. As such, governance requirements 
surrounding the selection of people who sit on boards are critically important in preserving the safety and 
soundness of financial institutions and financial systems. Central Bank of Argentina (2020a) specifically 
emphasises gender equality at board level as a  good practice which enhances discussion and enrich es 
decision-making with regard to strategies, policies and risk-taking in financial institutions. 
22. One of the main regulatory objectives relevant to D&I is for boards of directors as a whole 
to possess “collective suitability ”. In the European Union 27 supervisors assess whether managemen t 
bodies are “collectively suitable” by considering the knowledge and skills of each individual member in 
the assessment of board members’ suitability. Some European Union countries further tackle other 
diversity aspects in this assessment. In the United Kingdom,28 supervisors assess the “collective suitability” 
of board members, including from a diversity perspective, before approving board member appointments. 
The Prudential Authority in South Africa considers gender and race diversity when undertaking su itability 
assessments of insurers. I n the suitability assessment of board members of significant institutions, the 
European Central Bank  assesses knowledge diversity as a component of collective suitability in line with  
the provisions of  European Union (2013a) , as implemented in national legislation.  Gender is also 
considered in such assessment s if specified in  national legislatio n. During supervisory interviews with 
appointees, supervisors may pose any questions that could help determine the appointee’s knowledge or 
future plans in relation to the supervised entity . The questions may  include diversity-related topics, for 
example succession planning, current and future composition of the board  or the firm’s diversity policy. 
Regulators in the United  Kingdom are considering clarifying suitability assessment criteria to  explicitly 
make reference to non-financial misconduct in relation to D&I. 
Board composition 
23. D&I governance requirements relating to board composition typically cover t he 
appointment process of board members and regular reviews of board effectiveness . In practice, 
board member  nominations are usually  overseen by a board -level nominations committee.  European 
Union (2013 a) requires significant firms’ nominations committees to establish a policy to promote the 
diversity of their management bod ies and to assess the diversity of such bodies.  In the United Kingdom, 
nominations committees in regulated financial institutions  must set gender targets for the board so that 
it is not dominated by  a small group of board members. Central Bank of Argentina (2020a) provides 
guidance on how b oards can approve staff sel ection policies that promote inclusive and diverse work 
environments for the appointment of senior management and other staff. Regulators in the United 
Kingdom are considering clarifying their licensing or threshold conditions such that firms proven to 
engage in discriminatory practices may be prohibited from carrying out regulated business. Effectively, a 
firm’s D&I track record may become a consideration before being granted a licen ce to operate. 
 
27  See European Central Bank (2021b). 
28  See Bank of England and Financial Conduct Authority (2021). 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 17 
 
 
Other governance-related requirements 
24. Diversity-related governance requirements may cover aspects beyond board composition, 
such as requirements for firms to establish policies on D&I, recruitment, retention and promotion, 
and management reporting and training. This is the case in  Argentina and  the United States. T he 
prudential and conduct regulators in the United Kingdom plan to cover similar areas such as succession 
planning, the establishment of a D&I policy and training. European Banking Authority and European 
Securities and Markets Authorit y (2021) provides guidelines for banks to have a diversity policy in place  
that covers at least the following dimensions: educational and professional background, gender, age and 
geographical provenance. Central Bank of Ireland (2020) considers it particul arly important for firms to 
establish a D&I strategy that is aligned to their strategic objectives. Its thematic reviews of the insurance 
industry in Ireland identified the lack of such a strategy as a clear inhibitor to making progress in D&I. In 
South Africa, the Johannesburg Stock Exchange 29 requires boards of directors or nomination committees 
of listed firms, including financial institutions, to establish policies to promote gender and racial diversity 
at the board level.  Nevertheless, it is acknowledg ed that firms may face challenges in achieving their 
diversity recruitment targets. In the United States ,30 a common challenge faced by the largest banks is 
competition for diverse talent with science, technology, engineering, maths and finance-related expertise. 
Some supervisors may take a more sceptical approach and consider “lack of capable candidates ” to be 
more of an excuse than a real challenge. 
25. Like other governance-related requirements, boards of directors of firms can be assigned 
specific D&I oversight responsibilities.  Central Bank of Argentina (202 0a) recommends that boards of 
financial institutions establish policies for recruitment and succession planning for key executives and that 
they approve, monitor and review the design and operation of the firms’  remuneration system . 
Recruitment policies related to the appointment of senior management and other staff may consider not 
only gender equality but also the promotion of  an inclusive work environment in terms of gender, 
geographic origin, age, ethnic profile, professional experience, family composition and care 
responsibilities. Boards are also expecte d to establish policies for staff education and training on gender 
and gender-based violence. The joint inter -agency standard in the United States also recommends that 
certain regulated firms appoint a dedicated executive-level D&I officer. Regulators in the United Kingdom 
anticipate expanding the existing senior managers regime to capture accountability for D&I as part of the 
culture responsibilities of the relevant senior managers. 
Supervisory reviews 
26. In order to ascertain that regulatory requirements translate into concrete D&I outcomes , 
supervisory review assessments are  an important complement to governance-related D&I  
requirements. The Central Bank of Argentina has incorporated  D&I governance aspects  in its internal 
supervisory procedures  so that  supervisors consider these issues when assessing firms’ corporate 
governance. The European Central Bank assesses gaps or weaknesses related to diversity, where possible, 
as part of its  fit and proper assessments of board members , which consider the  collective suitability 
criterion, and via ongoing supervision as part of the Supervisory Review and Evaluation P rocess (SREP).31 
It should be noted that inclusion is not assessed in this cont ext, as it goes beyond the European Central 
Bank’s remit. Depending on the outcomes of the assessments, it may impose ancillary provisions in fit and 
proper decisions and remind banks of the need to comply with the  regulatory framework in order to 
improve diversity of  management bodies . Slow progress in pursuing diversity of expertise may pose 
 
29  See Johannesburg Stock Exchange (2019).  
30  See United States House of Representatives (2000).  
31  See European Central Bank (2021d). 
  
 
18 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
challenges to banks in driving strategic and sustainable business model transformation in key areas such 
as digitalisation. In some agencies, there might not be  an explicit supervisory review process focusing on 
D&I aspects specifically. Nevertheless, supervisors might still indirectly capture some D&I aspects when 
assessing the quality of communication within the institution and the challeng e role of the control 
functions. Supervisors may also review publicly available information such as firms’ annual reports.  
27. Supervisory reviews of a firm’s D&I policies and practices can be undertaken as part of a 
broader review of its culture. Regulators in the United Kingdom have proposed more explicitly 
considering D&I aspects when assessing a firm’s culture, which is already the case in South Africa . This 
may take the form of asking board members to explain their leadership role in promoting D&I, assessing 
the existence of relevant policies such as speaking up, or more generally, reviewing how D&I is embedded 
within a firm, its  strategy, products  and services. To supplement supervisor y reviews, D&I audits, as 
contemplated in the United Kingdom, can be helpful in assessing organisational risks arising from poor 
D&I within firms. Industry-wide thematic reviews can also be useful in benchmarking firms and identifying 
outliers, to encourage laggards to improve their D&I practices.  
Gender diversity 
28. Certain regulatory regimes have a specific focus on improving gender diversity in financial 
institutions. European Banking Authority and European Securities and Markets Authority (2021) provide 
guidelines to the largest institutions to set targets for the underrepresented gender32 in their management 
bodies. In the European Union, 33 supervisors assess banks’ self -imposed or nationally required gender 
targets as part of the collective suitability assessment of the board , whenever national laws so provide . 
The fit and proper template 34 questionnaire used to gather information to assess  an appointee includes 
specific questions on gender diversity and targets. Following its 2021 SREP ,35 the European Central Bank 
expressed concerns regarding the effectiveness of management bodies in terms of their composition and 
collective suitability, as well as a lack of progress in meeting quantitative gender targets. Other regulatory 
regimes like in Hong Kong SAR rely on broader public listing rules to set gender targets. Hong Kong  SAR 
securities issuers (including banks) are required to step up their efforts on board gender diversity. Effective 
1 January 2022, 36 issuers with a single gender board have a three -year transition period within which to  
appoint at least one director of a different gender.  
29. D&I gender-related policies work hand  in hand to support the broader D&I objectives of 
firms. For example, to attract more female applicants , firms need to demonstrate fair, gender -neutral 
remuneration packages. Recruitment practices should be de -biased as much as possible, to provide fair 
opportunities for women to enter the financial services workforce.  Over the period 2022 to 2024, 37 the 
European Central Bank will enhance its focus on diversity as part of its work related to management bodies’ 
effectiveness and sound decision -making in order to further  improve diversity in significant institutions. 
The supervisory activities include data collection, targeted reviews of banks with deficiencies in the 
composition and functioning of their management bodies, on-site inspections and targeted risk-based fit 
and proper (re)assessments. In addition to the actions already undertaken, further initiatives are planned 
to address the lack of gender balance. The European Central Bank also plans to assess how gender diversity 
 
32  Underrepresented gender can be male or female, though in most cases women are underrepresented. 
33  See European Central Bank (2021a). 
34  See European Central Bank (2021c).  
35  See European Central Bank (2022b). 
36  See The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (2021). 
37  See European Central Bank (2021d). 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 19 
 
 
is captured in banks’ diversity and suitabi lity policies and practices, including those related to 
remuneration. 
30. Besides board composition, gender diversity features in regulatory requirements relating 
to firm’s policies on remuneration, recruitment, career development and succession  policies. The 
European Central Bank expects the succession policies of banks to aim to increase the representation of 
women in the management body . In a similar vein, Central Bank of Argentina (202 0a) recommends that 
financial institutions consider the progressive appointment of women in new vacancies or renewals of 
terms until gender parity is achieved. European Union legislation38 and guidelines39 require remuneration 
policies to be gender-neutral. Institutions are expected to monitor the development o f the gender pay 
gap separately for identified staff and members of management bodies  and disclose information on the 
gender pay gap. Financial Conduct Authority (2015) requires conduct and prudential regulated firms in 
the United Kingdom to establish gend er neutral remuneration policies that do not discriminate against 
any staff member, specifically during performance reviews and when determining variable remuneration. 
Regulators in the United Kingdom may introduce guidance on how firms can use D&I metrics  as part of 
non‑financial criteria when setting variable remuneration awards. Building on the Equalities Act 2010, they 
may also issue rules to prohibit discriminatory pay practices. 
 
38  See European Union (2013a).  
39  See European Banking Authority (2021b). 
Box 1 
Gender diversity in the financial sector – too little but not too late 
The most prominent aspect of D&I initiatives in the financial sector is gender diversity. This can be attributed to 
legislation on gender equality, in some cases, requiring corporations including financial institutions to set gender 
targets in the ir workforce. Moreover, the efforts of financial institutions to improve gender diversity, especially at 
management level, are becoming increasingly visible. These developments are not a coincidence, as various studies 
have found that more gender -diverse financial institutions are better managed. For example, Arnaboldi et al (2020) 
examines the impact of governance reforms related to board diversity on the performance of E uropean Union banks 
and concludes that a greater presence of female directors on a board, when this is legally reinforced, reduces a bank’s 
risk. Harvard Business Review (2019) found that ”having  a diverse workforce helps companies acquire and retain the 
best talent, build employee engagement, increase innovation, and improve business performance”. 
While progress has been observed over the years, the pace of progress remains slow. International La bor 
Organization (2022) reported that the share of women  in managerial positions worldwide increased only slightly 
between 2000 and 2019 – from 25.3% to 28.3%. Remarkably, it estimates that at the current rate of progress, it will 
take more than 140 years to achieve gender parity in managerial positions. 
Gender composition 
In the European Union, nine countries (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and 
Spain) have national gender quotas applicable to management bodies.  The scope and application of the quotas differ 
according to national legislation (often applicable beyond financial institutions, for instance to listed companies). In 
addition, the national quotas are not always mandatory. The highest female quota is 40% (France, Italy and Spain), 
followed by 33% (Belgium  and Portugal), 30% (Austria, Germany  and the Netherlands) and 25% (Greece). The 
European Central Bank’s stocktake in 2021 found that the actual average female composition amongst 91 significant 
institutions in five of these countries remain s below the target (by between 3 and 12 percentage points). On a 
positive note, average female composition of the sampled significant institutions in four countries (Greece, Italy, the 
Netherlands and Spain) exceeded the gender quotas. In the Africa region, the International Finance Corporation found 
in a 2019 study that in Ghana only 6% of organisations had minimum thresholds for women on their board, 76% did 
not have minimum thresholds and 18%  failed to provide valid responses. In Nigeria, fewer  than 30% of companies 
have women in senior positions.  
  
 
20 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
United States regulators recommend that certain banks  monitor their D&I targets. The main indicator 
tracked is the number of female executives or female directors in an institution. They also focus on the number of 
women in mid-level management and working at a professional level. It is worth noting that the  United States Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission requires workforce disclosure to be further disaggregated and reported by 
race. In Argentina, banks are not required to set gender targets. Nevertheless, Central Bank of Argentina (2020a) 
considers it good practice for financial institutions to have a b oard of d irectors composed on the basis of gender 
parity.  
Gender pay gap 
Not only is female representation low at banks’ management levels and within the overall workforce, women are also 
paid less than men. According to a report by United Nations Women, in 2017, women only made 77 cents for every 
dollar earned by men, thereby limiting their ability to build wealth and experience a fully inclusive workspace. In order 
to narrow the gender pay gap, the Equ ality Act 2010 (Gender Pay Gap Information) Regulations 2017 were 
implemented in Great Britain . These Regulations impose obligations on institutions with 250 or more employees to 
publish information relating to the gender pay gap in their organisations. Thus, all global systemically important banks 
(G-SIBs) with operations in the United Kingdom and domestic systemically important banks (D -SIBs) publish gender 
pay gap reports annually as a matter of compliance, including information that covers the median an d mean hourly 
pay gap, the quartile range of mean and median gaps, and proportions of female to male employees. 
Measures to improve D&I in financial institutions 
Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (2015) recommends the adoption of measu res such as 
voluntary targets, disclosure requirements, boardroom quotas and private initiatives that enhance gender diversity on 
boards and in senior management.  
In the context of financial services, G -SIBs have made considerable efforts in improving div ersity in their 
firms through more focus on gender initiatives. A majority of the firms are signatories to the United Kingdom women 
in finance charter, which sets out targets to achieve at least 30% of women in senior roles by the year 2025. Some of 
the firms such as Barclays, M izuho Financial Group and Royal Bank of Canada, to name a few, are recognised in the 
Bloomberg Gender Equality Index (GEI) for their contribution s. The GEI tracks the performance of public companies 
committed to disclosing their ef forts to support gender equality through policy development, representation and 
transparency. The most common practices to improve gender diversity by G-SIBs are:  
• recruiting gender-diverse talent;  
• promoting education, training and professional developmen t for current female employees and future 
recruits, including through mentorships and women empowerment workshops;  
• connecting with diverse communities and promoting equality through community initiatives and advocacy; 
• creating means for collecting and publicly reporting data on diversity; and 
• ensuring a high level of health, safety and well-being of workers including supporting human rights and non-
discriminatory practices as well as establishing employee resource groups.  
  See European Parliament (2021).      See European Central Bank (2022a, b).      All banks supervised under the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) are classified as significant institutions or less significant institutions. This classification subsequently determines who is 
their direct supervisor – the ECB for significant banks or the national competent authorities (NCAs) for less significant banks. In both cases, 
the ECB oversees the system in accordance with the responsibilities and procedures outlined in the SSM Regulation. Article 6(4) of the 
Regulation sets out specific rules for identifying significance status. Some refer to thresholds related to a bank’s size, national economic 
importance or cross-border activities.      See International Finance Corporation (2019).      See  Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency et al (2015).      See International Labor Organization (2016). 
 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 21 
 
 
Section 5 – Conduct of business  
31. As f inancial service s are  people-centric, financial institutions are  exposed to  risks of 
engaging in potentially discriminatory practices that can go against D&I objectives. Unfair business 
practices typically impact “inclusion” more than “ diversity” in relation to customers.  Central Bank of 
Argentina (2013) states that users of financial services have the right, like in any consumer relationship s, 
to equitable and dignified t reatment conditions. The Treat customers fairly charter,40 developed by the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the banking industry, specifies that banks in Hong Kong  SAR that 
engage in mass retail market activities should provide the public with reasonable access to basic banking 
services, paying special attention to the needs of vulnerable groups.  It is useful to identify customer 
touchpoints within a financial institution to understand areas in which customer D&I matters . Table 5  
provides an illustrative example of how customer D&I issues may arise throughout a ll stages of the 
customer relationship. This matches the approach taken by the Financial Sector Conduct Authority in South 
Africa that requires regulated entities to deliver “ treating customers fairly ” outcomes to their customers 
throughout a product’s life cycle, from product design and promotion, through to advice and servicing to 
complaints and claims handling. 
32. Discriminatory and exclusionary  business practices can have prudential implications for 
firms. The most obvious link between poor conduct of firms and their financial soundness is through 
reputational risk. Mass customer withdrawals or boycott can severely impact a firm’s business operations 
and financial position. In the worst case  scenario, lawsuits or regulatory fines for discriminatory practices 
can impair a firm’s financial position. As such, sound D&I conduct by firms is not only relevant for 
authorities with a conduct of business mandate, but also prudential authorities more generally. However , 
detecting discriminatory practices may be challenging. One way is for financial authorities to monitor 
consumer complaints to detect mistreatment by firms. This approach may also reveal reputational risks for 
 
40  See Hong Kong Monetary Authority (2013).  
41  Citizens Advice (2022) found that people of colour in England generally pay hundreds of pounds more than white people for 
their car insurance, a phenomenon they termed the “ethnicity penalty”. 
Examples of potentially adverse impacts on customers Table 5 
Customer journey 
stage Gender Ethnicity Disability 
Sales and marketing  Targeted advertisements for 
women based on traditional 
family unit assumption (eg 
stay-at-home housewives). 
Favourable offers to consumers 
living in certain postcodes that 
are predominantly white. 
Marketing materials 
containing crucial 
information not accessible to 
blind consumers. 
Underwriting Additional underwriting 
criteria or information 
requests for women or non-
binary genders. 
Systemic rejection of consumers 
from a certain ethnic group. 
Additional underwriting 
criteria or information 
requests for people with 
disabilities. 
Pricing Discriminatory pricing 
against women that is not 
based on risk profiles. 
Discriminatory pricing against 
ethnic minorities that is not 
based on risk profiles.41 
Discriminatory pricing 
against people with 
disabilities that is not based 
on risk profiles. 
Ongoing customer 
servicing 
Biased service levels from 
customer support staff eg in 
terms of courtesy or 
responsiveness. 
Biased service levels from 
customer support staff eg in 
terms of courtesy, respect or 
responsiveness.  
Difficulty in accessing full 
range of services (eg ATM) 
that require full sight, 
mobility, speech or hearing.  
Source: FSI staff. 
  
 
22 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
firms arising from poor D&I practices. This approach is utilised by the Prudential Authority in South Africa 
and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority  – they focus on individual cases with  consumer protection and  
financial inclusion implications. 
33. Major D&I regulatory issuance s typically focus on governanc e-related aspects , and  
customer-related D&I issues are not usually covered . Customer-related D&I issues may be covered in 
other regulatory guidelines or issuances such as those relating to risk management practices of firms.  
Prenio et al  (2021) described regulatory frameworks on the use of artificial intelligence by financial 
institutions and highlighted “ fairness” as one of the common elements in these frameworks. They found 
that fairness-related issues covered in AI  regulatory issuances are mainly from the perspective of  
addressing or preventing biases in AI algorithms that could lead to discriminatory outcomes . Some 
supervisory expectations in this area are more concrete than those specified for governance -related D&I 
aspects. For example, firms may be requir ed to establish an ethical code of conduct to promote non -
discriminatory practices; to seek diversity in input data  used in AI models; and to constantly monitor the 
performance of the model to identify unintentional bias or to ascertain that it behaves as intended. “Ethics” 
is another common principle in AI issuances and the authors found that supervisory  expectations in this 
regard are broader than “fairness”. Ethics relate to ascertaining that customers will not be exploited or 
harmed through bias, discrimination or other causes. 
34. There is a fine line between  risk-based underwriting and pricing  versus discriminating 
against certain segments of the population . In other words, there is a difference between segmenting 
customers for underwriting or pricing purposes based on their true risk profiles versus discriminating 
against customers based on their personal traits.  Financial Conduct Authority (2018) found that pricing 
practices of certain insurers in the United Kingdom risked discriminating against consumers through the 
use of rating factors based (directly or indirectly) on data derived from protected characteristics including 
ethnicity. Put simply, for example, when pricing a motor insurance policy, an insurer needs to acknowledge 
that being Asian or black or white does not make someone a better or worse driver. 
35. Conduct of business is an area in which “ inclusion” particularly matters, arguably even 
more than “diversity”. To treat customers fairly – the raison d’être of conduct of business regulations  – 
a core aspect is to avoid discriminatory business practices that can disadvantage consumers or exclude 
them from certain services.  In Hong Kong  SAR, the Code of Banking Practice, 42 issued by the banking 
industry and endorsed by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, commits banks not to discriminate against 
any customers on the ground of family status (for example single parents), sexuality, age or race in the 
provision of banking services and in the quality and terms of services provided. Banks are required to 
provide appropriate assista nce to, and adopt appropriate measures for , customers with impairments to 
facilitate access to banking services .43  They are also expected to  give due consideration to the 
community’s need for banking services and the impact on customers in the vicinity, in particular the elderly 
and those with impairments. Banks should also provide suitable training to frontline staff to raise their 
awareness of the principles and guidelines in relation to equal opportunity and the provision of assistance 
to customers with  any impairment. 44  Central Bank of Argentina (20 13) sets out requirements on how 
banks must offer accessible banking services to people with disabilities. This includes not requiring people 
with reduced mobility to queue for banking services or ATMs and p roviding text-to-speech options in 
ATMs for visually impaired customers.  
 
42  See Hong Kong Monetary Authority (2021). Banks in Hong Kong SAR must conduct annual self-assessments of their compliance 
with the Code of Banking Practice. 
43  For example, The Hong Kong Associatio n of Banks (2018) provides guidance on physical dimensions to enable barrier -free 
access in bank branches as well as colour contrast and voice navigation of ATMs. B anks were required to report on their  
implementation progress of the guidelines on a half-yearly basis until 2021. 
44  The Hong Kong Association of Banks (2021) and (2020) provide guidance on how to treat customers with dementia and 
intellectual disabilities respectively. 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 23 
 
 
36. Fair treatment of customers  means recognising not only visually identifiable differences  
like gender or ethnicity , but also personal circumstances of customers. Financial Conduct Aut hority 
(2021) outlines how firms should deal with vulnerable customers, which are defined as those who, due to 
their personal circumstances, are especially susceptible to harm, particularly when a firm is not acting with 
appropriate levels of care. It identifies four key drivers of vulnerability –  health (eg physical disability), life 
events (income shock), resilience (eg over-indebtedness) and capability (eg low literacy levels). In support 
of recognising gender identities of financial consume rs, Central Bank of Argentina (2015) sets out 
procedures to be followed in the event of rectification of identity documents such as change of sex and/or 
first name in the framework of the gender identity law. 
37. Certain regulatory issuances may go beyond the t ypical areas of regulatory focus.  For 
example, Central Bank of Argentina (2020b) aims  to eradicate gender-based violence and discrimination 
in advertising in print and digital media. It requires financial institutions to avoid practices or actions that 
reflect or promote stereotyped views of gender, use of sexist language and portray violence against 
women and LGBTQI+ people. These  include, for example, avoiding “mansplaining” behaviour or using 
images of women as objects that are unrelated to the product that is being promoted.  
Section 6 – Disclosure 
38. Major financial institutions typically publicly disclose their internal human resource-related 
D&I policies, initiatives and , in some cases, targets. However, it is uncommon to find disclosure of 
customer-related D&I policies. A comprehensive disclosure of the entire D&I focus of a firm both internal 
(human resource-related) and external (customer-related issues) can reinforce public trust and confidence, 
and serve as  a self-accountability mechanism. Regulators in the United Kingdom acknowledge the 
importance of data  and disclosure to understanding the D&I situation of firms, to monitoring progress 
and to holding relevant individuals and firms to account . In the United States, the Office of Minority and 
Women Inclusion (2022) provides useful benchmarking of aggregated publicly available D&I information 
about 270 regulated financial entities. This helped to outline best practice recommendations on D&I public 
disclosure. Nevertheless, the United States House of Representatives (2000) noted that there are 
challenges relating to voluntary public D&I disclosure as financial institutions may not be incentivised to  
make such disclosures . It called for new legislation to make such  disclosures mandatory in the United 
States. 
39. The three common items in D&I disclosure requirements are D&I policies or strategies, the 
objectives of those policies and measurement of progress. In the European Union,45 and in the United 
Kingdom, banks must disclose , at least annually , their policies o n diversity with regard s to selection of 
members of the management body, the objectives of such policies and any relevant targets set out in 
those policies. Listed firms in the United Kingdom,46 are also expected to include a section in their annual 
reports on the board’s policy on diversity including gender, measurable objectives of the policy and 
progress in achieving them. In Argentina, financial institutions  are expected to disclose on their public 
websites and in notes to financial statements or other periodic disclosures , information on their gender 
policies and practices. In the United States,47 regulated entities are expected to disclose annually their D&I 
strategic plan, metrics to measure success in achieving diversity of their workforce and procurement 
 
45  See European Union (2013b) and European Banking Authority (2016). 
46  See Financial Reporting Council (2016). Financial Conduct Authority (2022) sets out requirements for listed firms in the United 
Kingdom to disclose information in their annual financial statements relating to the following targets: at least 40% of  the 
individuals on its board of directors should be  women; at least one of the specified  senior positions (chair, chief executive 
officer etc) on its board of directors should be a woman. Firms are required to explain when those targets are not met. 
47  See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency et al (2015). 
  
 
24 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
activities, as well as current and future employment and procurement opportunities . Firms should also 
undertake self-assessments at least annually on their diversity policies and practices.  
40. Publicly-listed financial institutions are subject to listing rules that include disclosure of 
diversity-related policies. The Hong Kong Stock Exchange,48 requires securities issuers (including banks) 
to disclose their policy on board diversity, including any measurable objectives and progress towards 
achieving those objectives. Specifically, listed firms are required to disclose numerical targets and timelines 
for achieving gender diversity within the board and in their workforce. In addition, listed firms are subject 
to ESG disclosure rules that include disclos ure of  information relating to compensation and dismissal, 
recruitment and promotion, working hours, rest periods, equal opportunity, diversity, anti -discrimination 
and other benefits and welfare .49  The Johannesburg Stock Exchange, 50 requires listed companies to 
disclose in their annual reports how the board of directors or the nomination committee have considered 
and applied the ir policy on gender and racial diversity in the nomination and appointment of directors . 
Progress in meeting any voluntary gender or racial targets must also be disclosed.  
41. Disclosure of the appointment of members of the board of directors  is important to 
support the overarching D&I objective of diversity of thought for better decision -making. Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (2015) specifies that, at a minimum, banks should annually disclose 
information on the selection of members of the board. The European Union 51 has adopted this principle 
and, in addition, requires banking groups to disclose 52 the gender and duration of appointment of each 
member of the management body of each group entity.  Central Bank of Argentina (202 0a) recommends 
reporting of the percentage of gender representation in the board of d irectors, the audit body, senior 
management and the firm overall. In addition, firms are expected to disclose the selection process of board 
members, qualifications and gender parity criteria. The application of these recommendations consider s 
the principle of proportionality based on the size, complexity, ownership structure, economic importance 
and risk profile of a financial institution. 
42. It is not common for regulators to define specific D&I metrics that firms must disclose to 
track progress. Yet, most regulators acknowledge that disclosure of such metrics is important to sustain 
momentum for firms to make progress in achieving their D&I o bjectives. Public disclosure of data allows 
firms to target their D&I interventions and assess whether these are working as intended.  Voluntary D&I 
disclosure can leave firms complacent, thus perpetuating the lack of progress.  However, it may not be 
necessary to specify the metrics to disclose because the policy intent in this regard is not to obtain 
standardised, comparable information. Rather, it is to motivate firms to make progress to improve their 
D&I practices. World Economic Forum (2020 a) provides ex amples of some D&I metrics that firms can 
disclose including the: (i) percentage of employees per employee category, by age group, gender and 
other indicators of diversity (eg ethnicity) and (ii) ratio of the basic salary and remuneration for women to 
men, and for minor to major ethnic groups . Financial Conduct Authority (2022) specifies two tables with 
specific metrics for public disclosure by listed financial institutions covering gender and ethnicity 
separately.  
43. In some jurisdictions, D&I disclosures ar e required by non -financial authorities.  For 
example, in South Africa, all employers (including financial institutions) with over 50 employees are 
required to submit employment equity plans to the Department of Labour. These statistics are collated 
and are used to monitor progress made on employment equity in various sectors in South Africa. South 
African insurers are required to submit transformation plans to the Prudential Authority , in line with the 
 
48  See The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (2021). 
49  See The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (2019). 
50  See Johannesburg Stock Exchange (2019).  
51  See European Union (2013b). 
52  See European Banking Authority (2021a). 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 25 
 
 
Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment Act, outlining how they are performing against the Financial 
sector charter targets and their own employment equity plans. In addition to recommendations to report 
to federal financial regulatory authorities, firms in the United States are also subject to requirements issued 
by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance 
Programs.  
Section 7 – Proportionate application of D&I regulatory approaches 
44. Like most prudential requirements, regulatory approaches on D&I allow firms to apply the 
principle of proportionality in tailoring application of the rules to the specific nature and risk profile 
of individual firms. For example, European Banking Authority and European Securities and Markets 
Authority (2021) requires only “significant institutions” to have a gender target for the management body 
and to set out a deadline to achieve the target. Only such  firms must conduct  an annual review of the 
composition of their management bod ies, diversity targets and objectives . Fi rms with fewer than five 
members of their management body can express the target qualitatively. The general proportionality 
criteria in European Union (2013a ,b) that distinguish between significant and other institutions are also 
applicable to D&I requirements. In the United States, the joint standards53 mainly apply to regulated firms 
with more than 100 employees. Micro-enterprises in South Africa, defined as entities with annual revenue 
of less than ZAR 10 million, are exempted from the Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment Act . In 
the United Kingdom, regulators are considering how any future policies on D&I could be implemented in 
a proportionate way. In addition to the size and complexity of firms, other criteria that may be considered 
include business volume and number of employees. Central Bank of Argentina (2020a) tailors D&I 
disclosure requirements based on a firm’s size, complexity, ownership structure, economic importance and 
risk profile. Requirements for listed and unlisted firms are also different.  
45. Achieving D&I is more challenging for smaller firms , for example, firms with two or three 
board members. Financial authorities in the United States recognise that smaller firms or firms located in 
remote areas may face challenges  in implementing the standards.54  Smaller firms may be constrained in 
terms of using the personal data of their staff members to advance D&I objectives as their smaller data 
set may more easily reveal personally identifiable traits. Lar ger firms may have the advantage of more 
resources to employ dedicated personnel to specifically deal with D&I issues, such as the appointment of 
a dedicated D&I officer. Regulatory frameworks seeking to introduce explicit D&I guidance or 
requirements may consider adopting  a proportionate approach, given these practical implementation 
challenges and associated costs.  
Section 8 – Concluding remarks 
46. Even with the small sample of jurisdictions covered in th is paper, we observed different  
areas of focus or aspects of emphasis in the different D&I regulatory approaches. These differences 
in focus can be attributed to a jurisdiction’s history, culture and social disposition. Certain jurisdictions are 
primarily concerned with treating ethnic minorities more fairly, while others are mainly concerned with the 
accessibility of banking services by disabled customers. As a result, regulatory issuances on D&I tend to 
cover specific aspects relating to corporate governance, disclosure or conduct of business  that are driven 
by these jurisdiction-specific considerations. Typically, regulatory coverage of D&I aspects relate only to 
 
53  See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency et al (2015). 
54  Visco (2021) outlined how smaller firms might need more time to close the gender gap. 
  
 
26 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
corporate governance, specifically to the gender diversity of board members. It might be worthwhile  for 
jurisdictions to consolidate these disparate regulatory issuances in order to have a coherent regulatory 
framework covering all D&I aspects that matter for financial institutions.  
47. While there has been noticeable progress in improving firms’ D&I, especially in the area of 
gender, the pace needs to accelerate and the scope broadened to other dimensions. One way to 
accelerate progress is to consider requiring  mandatory disclosure and regular supervisory reporting of 
D&I metrics. D&I data is important to provide objective evidence of the true picture at a firm. There are 
low hanging fruit that can make a significant difference, for example disclosure of gender-related metrics 
to accelerate gender diversity. Efforts should be made to consider other D&I dimensions beyond gender, 
which are likely to be pursued by certain regulatory authorities. It is  expected that regulatory frameworks 
will expand to require banks to be more inclusive of underrepresented population segments, for example 
transgender people, in the provision of financial services. Authorities could also consider setting the 
duration of board members’ appointments to lower the average age of boards, thus contributing to 
stimulating debate in decision-making processes and avoiding groupthink and concentrations of power. 
48. D&I regulatory development is a marathon, not a sprint.  There is a continuous  cycle of  
learning, improvement and enhancement to integrate D&I issues into regu latory frameworks. As part of 
this process, close engagement with supervised entities will be crucial to ascertain the “implementability” 
of any new policies. Insights gained from ongoing supervisory activities should flow through to enhancing 
policy and supervisory expectations. It is important to recognise and tackle longstanding c ultural and 
historical norms that are  inhibiting progress in D&I. Certain D&I dimensions, such as matters relating to 
LGBTQI+ communities, may confront cultural taboos. In certain regions, firms may prefer longer -serving 
employees and typically this means men as women tend to retire earlier. These issues go beyon d the 
regulatory remit but must be addressed more fundamentally at the broader societal level before any 
meaningful change can be introduced in the financial sector. In addition, institutions can consider their 
own roles in building up a diverse pipeline and developing an inclusive environment – both internally and 
towards their customer base. 
49. Financial regulators can lead by example in demonstrating the importance of D&I.  As 
financial regulators are typically held in high regard, they can drive positive change in firms even indirectly 
through various actions such as having senior officials speak about D&I issues or participating in D&I 
events to show support. Establishing and publishing their own D&I policies could also send a strong signal 
about their commitment to D&I in support of broader , sound governance objectives. This may translate 
into internal regulatory processes such as using inclusive language in issuances.  
50. International standards and guidance on D&I might be helpful  to prompt progress in 
improving the quality of corporate governance of regulated financial institutions, thus enhancing 
the safety and soundness of firms and of the financial sector. A consistent or harmonised international 
approach on D&I regulation can improve the operational effi ciencies of cross -border or internationally 
active firms in particular. Nevertheless, any such global standards should cast D&I as one of several 
important components of banks’ corporate governance and culture. The broader prudential objectives of 
preserving the safety and soundness of banks should be borne in mind.  
  
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 27 
 
 
References 
Arnaboldi, F, B Casu, E Kalotychou and A Sarkisyan (2020): Board Diversity Reforms: Do They Matter for EU 
Bank Performance?, May. 
Bank of England and Financial Conduct Authority (2021): “ Diversity and inclusion in the financial sector – 
working together to drive change”, D iscussion Paper , DP21/2, July. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015): Corporate governance principles for banks, July. 
Central Bank of Argentina (2013): “Protection of users of financial services: c onsolidated text”, 
Communication A 5388, January. 
——— (2015): “Rectification of identity documents. Law 26,743, Law 18,248, cases of recovery of identity 
and modification of the national identity document number – valid identification documents ”, 
Communication A 5709, February. 
——— (2020a): “Corporate governance guidelines for financial institutions’ adjustments“, Communication 
A 7100, September. 
——— (2020b): “Policies against violence and discrimination based on gender in graphic and digital media 
advertising”,  Communication A 7162, November. 
Central Bank of Ireland (2018): Behaviour and culture of the Irish retail banks, July. 
——— (2020): Thematic assessment of diversity & inclusion in insurance firms, July. 
Citizens Advice (2022): Citizens Advice sounds the alarm on £280 car insurance ethnicity penalty, March. 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2022): CFPB report on diversity and i nclusion within financial 
services, January. 
Ehlers, T, U Elsenhuber, A Jegarasasingam and E Jondeau (2022): “Deconstructing ESG scores: How to invest 
with your own criteria”, B IS Working Papers , No 1008, March. 
European Banking Authority (2016): Guidelines on disclosure requirements under Part Eight of Regulation 
(EU) No 575/2013, December. 
——— (2021a): Guidelines on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU, September. 
——— (2021b): Guidelines on sound remuneration policies under Directive 2013/36/EU, July. 
European Banking Authority and European Securities and Markets Authority (20 21): Guidelines on the 
assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key function holders under Directive 
2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU, J uly . 
European Central Bank (2021a): ECB Banking supervision seeking greater diversity within banks, June. 
——— (2021b): Guide to fit and proper assessments, December. 
——— (2021c): Updated fit and proper questionnaire – ECB template, December. 
——— (2021d): ECB banking supervision: SSM supervisory priorities for 2022-2024, December. 
——— (2022a): SREP 2021 press conference, February. 
——— (2022b): Speech by Andrea Enria, Chair of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, at the press conference 
on the results of the 2021 SREP cycle, February. 
European Parliament (2021): Women on boards policies in m ember states and the e ffects on c orporate 
governance, December. 
  
 
28 Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 
 
 
European Union (2013a): Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 
2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervisi on of credit institutions and 
investment firms, June. 
——— (2013b): Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European P arliament and of the C ouncil of 26 June 
2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms, June. 
Equality and Human Rights Commission (2019): Financial services inquiry: sex discrimination and gender 
pay gap report of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, September. 
Financial Conduct Authority (2015): Dual-regulated firms Remuneration Code (SYSC 19D), June. 
—— (2018): Pricing practices in the retail general insurance sector: household insurance, October. 
—— (2019): The senior managers and certification regime: guide for FCA solo-regulated firms, July. 
—— (2021): Guidance for firms on the fair treatment of vulnerable customers, February. 
—— (2022): Diversity and inclusion on company boards and executive management, April. 
Financial Reporting Council (2016): The UK Corporate Governance Code, April. 
Garcia-Meca, E, I Garcia -Sanchez and J Martinez -Ferrero (2015): Board diversity and its effects  on bank 
performance: an international analysis, April. 
Haldane, A (2016): “The diversity project”, opening remarks given at the Investment Association launch of 
the Diversity Project, 8 November. 
Harvard Business Review (2019): “ Survey: What Diversity and Inclusion Policies Do Employees Actually 
Want?”, February. 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority (2013): Treat customers fairly charter, October. 
—— (2021): Code of Banking Practice, December. 
International Finance Corporation (2019): Women on boards in Nigeria, 2019. 
International Labor Organization (2022): Covid-19 and the sustainable d evelopment goals: reversing 
progress towards decent work for all, March.  
—— (2016): Women at work trends 2016, March. 
Institute of Directors Southern Africa (2016): King IV report on corporate governance for South Africa 2016, 
November. 
Johannesburg Stock Exchange (2019): JSE Limited listing requirements, April. 
Kirakul, S, J Yong and R Zamil (2021):  “The universe of supervisory mandates - total eclipse of the core? ”, 
FSI Insights on policy implementation, no 30, March. 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Bureau of Consumer 
Financial Protection and the Securities and Exchange Commission (2015): Final interagency policy 
statement establishing joint standards for assessing the diversity policies and practices of entities regulated 
by the agencies, June. 
Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development  (2015): G20/OECD principles of c orporate 
governance, N ovember . 
Prenio, J, J Yong (2021): “Humans keeping AI in check – emerging regulatory expectations in the financial 
sector”, FSI Insights on policy implementation, no 35, August. 
Republic of South Africa (2004): Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment Act 2003, January. 
  
 
Diversity and inclusion – embracing the true colours in financial supervision 29 
 
 
—— (2017): Financial Sector Regulation Act 2017, August. 
The Hong Kong Association of Banks (2018): Practical guideline on barrier-free banking services, March. 
—— (2020): Guideline on banking services for persons with intellectual disabilities, December. 
—— (2021): Guideline on banking services for persons with dementia, December. 
The Stock Exchange of Hong  Kong Limited (2019): Rules governing the l isting of s ecurities on the stock 
exchange of Hong Kong Limited, December. 
—— (2021): Rules governing the listing of securities on the stock exchange of Hong Kong Limited, December. 
United Kingdom (2010): Equality Act 2010. 
United Kingdom HM Treasury (2016): Women in Finance Charter, March. 
United States House of Representatives (2000): Diversity and inclusion: holding America’s large banks 
accountable, February. 
Visco, I (2021): “Ignazio Visco: speech”, remarks at the Annual Meeting of the Italian Banking Association, 
July. 
World Economic Forum (2019): The global competitiveness report 2019, October. 
—— (2020a): Measuring s takeholder capitalism: t owards common metrics and consistent reporting of 
sustainable value creation white paper, September. 
—— (2020b): Global competitiveness report special edition 2020: how countries are performing on the road 
to recovery, December. 