Special Issue Article
Competition & Change
2026, Vol. 30(1) 177 – 199
© The Author(s) 2024
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/10245294241261878
journals.sagepub.com/home/cch
Getting robots in ‘our own hands ’:
Structural drivers, spatial dynamics
and multi-scalar industrial policy in
China
Antonio Andreoni 
Department of Economics, Centre for Sustainable Structural Transformation, SOAS University of London, London, UK;
South African Research Chair in Industrial Development, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
Federico Frattini  and Giorgio Prodi 
Department of Economics and Management, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy
Abstract
Robots are a key digital production technology of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. In 2020, China
accounted for one third of all industrial robots in operation globally. The emerging literature has
mainly focused on the effects of robotization, while evidence on its drivers and spatial diffusion
remain limited. We address this gap by producing new evidence on the complex mix of structural
and policy factors driving fast robotization across China and its regions. We identify three
‘structural drivers ’ of robotization – demand pull, supply push and capability preconditions – and
study the resulting spatial dynamics of technology adoption. We ﬁnd signi ﬁcant heterogeneity in
robots’ adoption across regions and sectors, in robots manufacturing and technological capabilities.
Furthermore, we highlight the key role of a fourth ‘policy driver’– industrial policy – and conduct an
in-depth analysis of robotization policies at the national and province levels since 2016. We identify
four main robotizing regional hubs in China – Guangdong, Yangtze-River-Delta, Beijing-Tianjin and
Jilin-Liaoning. We ﬁnally analyse three emerging policy interfaces linking Made in China 2025 (within
which China ’s robotization policy is framed) and the Belt and Road Initiative – that is, opening
markets, shaping industry and standards, and directing ﬁnance. With this new multi-scalar industrial
policy conﬁguration, China is further reshaping the domestic and international political economy of
robotization, ultimately moving the country ahead in the digital technology race.
Keywords
Robots, diffusion, structural drivers, industrial policy, China, regional hubs, made in China 2025, belt
and road initiative
Corresponding author:
Antonio Andreoni, Department of Economics, Centre for Sustainable Structural Transformation, SOAS University of
London, Thornhaugh Street Russell Square, London WC1H OXG, UK.
Email: aa155@soas.ac.uk

JEL Codes
O14, O25, O30, R11
Introduction
The emergence and diffusion of new technologies of the so-called Fourth Industrial Revolution
(4IR) is increasingly transforming the nature of industrial sectors and opening the way to new
organizational and business models. Advances in technology, such as sensorization, additive
manufacturing and intelligent automation, robots and collaborative robots, as well as related data
analytics – Internet of Things (IoT), digital platforms and supply chains – have opened new
windows of opportunity for industrial innovation ( Sturgeon, 2021 ). These technologies and their
‘fusion’ into new digital technology systems have the potential to increase ﬁrms’ productivity,
reshape employment dynamics and redesign the geography of production ( Andreoni et al., 2021 ).
The ﬁrst computer-controlled automated production lines were installed in the USA in the 1970s.
Further technological and commercial developments were reported in Germany and Japan
throughout the 1980s and 1990s (Gasparetto and Scalera, 2019), especially thanks to the rise of ICTs
and the fusion of electronic, electrical and mechanical engineering into mechatronics ( Kodama,
1986). Since the early 1990s, Japan has gradually established world leadership in robot technologies
and innovation, with country’s industrial policy playing an important role (Johnson, 1982; Okimoto,
1989). Japan launched the Japan Robot Leasing Company and promoted concessional ﬁnance and
fast depreciation of capital investments in robots. Since 2000, the geography of robotization has
further shifted towards Asia, driven by the fast catching up of ﬁrst South Korea and then China. 1
Globally, the period between 2012 and 2017 has been the one with the strongest expansion in
robot adoption, with average robot sales increasing by 19% (Compound Average Growth Rate,
CAGR) over the period. This expansion was mainly driven by Asia (China, Japan and South Korea),
where the CAGR for the same period reached 25%. The following 2 years recorded a global
slowdown in growth (from 30% in 2017 to 6% in 2018) and, for the ﬁrst time, a decline in 2019 (a
10% drop in new robot adoption) mainly due to sector-speci ﬁc dynamics affecting robots users in
automotive and electronic industries, as well as rising trade con ﬂicts ( IFR, 2021 ). Despite the
pandemic, in 2020, robot adoption grew again by 0.5% driven by the electrical and electronics
(E&E) industry which surpassed the automotive industry as the largest user of robots for the
ﬁrst time.
China became the biggest robot market in 2013, and since then has consolidated its position as
world leader in robot adoption. Nonetheless, the literature has mainly generated cross-country
evidence and country-level studies focussing on the impact of robotization on productivity and
employment dynamics in advanced economies (e.g. Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020 ; Graetz and
Michaels, 2018). Evidence for developing countries remains limited, with few notable exceptions.
Fu et al. (2021) found a disproportional impact of robotization among 74 developed and developing
economies between 2004 and 2016, with insigni ﬁcant gains in labour productivity and total
employment in developing countries, but higher income inequality. Focussing on Brazil, Ferraz
et al. (2020) found that adoption of more advanced digital production technologies (ADPTs) is
associated with higher levels of ﬁrm capabilities and readiness, regardless of sectors and size. Delera
et al. (2022) found that the diffusion of ADPTs remains limited in Ghana, Viet Nam and Thailand,
however, their adoption is positively associated with ﬁrms’participation in Global V alue Chains
(GVCs) and results in a labour productivity premium. With a focus on the automotive value chain
178 Competition & Change 30(1)
across 34 countries, Anzolin et al. (2022) found that Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) per se do not
drive robots adoption in the host country, but FDIs become a signi ﬁcant driver of robotization when
interacted with proxies of host countries ’innovation capabilities.
Recent contributions focussing on China look at the effects of robotization. Duan et al. (2023)
ﬁnd that robotization is associated with productivity increases among Chinese listed companies by
improving human capital and innovation capabilities; however, the relationship is U-shaped ( Du
and Lin, 2022 ). Several studies also ﬁnd positive effects of robot adoption on high-skilled em-
ployment (e.g. Hu et al., 2023 ; Tang et al., 2021 ; Wang et al., 2024 ), and a related rise in income
inequality (Lai et al., 2023 ). Overall, robotization tend to have a positive effect on employment in
the long term ( Du and Wei, 2022 ), although broader ﬁrms’performances tend to improve more in
capital-intensive sectors ( Huang et al., 2023 ). There is also evidence of a link between robotization
and industrial innovation (e.g. Han and Mao, 2023; Wang et al., 2023) and export quality and scope
(Hong et al., 2023; Qi and Zhang, 2023), despite heterogeneity (Lu et al., 2023) and time-lags (Hong
et al., 2022 ). A systematic literature review is presented in Appendix A .
Evidence on the drivers and spatial dynamics of robotization within China remain scarce,
however. Cheng et al. (2019) combined aggregate industry-level and ﬁrm-level data to investigate
both supply- and demand-side factors responsible for fast robotization in manufacturing in China
(manufacturing sectors account for 80% of all robots). They ﬁnd a positive relationship linking
robotization to wage dynamics and manual tasks across ﬁrms; government subsidies are also found
shaping robot adoption among ﬁrms. Fan et al. (2021) also ﬁnd that robotization is driven by
increasing labour cost (minimum wage), although robotization does not always meet cost-reduction
expectations (Lei, 2022). Zhao and Gerefﬁ (2022) highlight the different roles of industrial policies,
public-private collaborations in R&D, technological spillovers from inward FDIs and international
acquisitions in upgrading the domestic industrial robot industry. Synergistic con ﬁgurations along
GVCs can support upgrading (Fu and Cheng, 2022). Finally, Kimura (2022) ﬁnds that Chinese ﬁrms
are catching up with technology leaders in the domains of robots ’ basic functions and robot
sophistication.
Despite fast robotization and increasing investments of multinational robot manufacturers in
China, the country is still catching up in the development of indigenous technological capabilities in
robots. The Chinese government has targeted robotization in its latest and most important national
industrial policy – that is, Made in China 2025 (MIC25) – to shift from robot adoption to robot
production and technological leadership. Other national and province-level initiatives can be traced
back to 2013 at least. These initiatives have evolved in a complex package of national and province-
based industrial policies, as revealed by alarmed reports from the U.S. and Germany ( Zenglein and
Holzmann, 2019; NSCAI, 2021). To paraphrase Xi Jinping ’s vivid language in the context of food
security when he states that ‘The Chinese people’s rice bowl must be ﬁrmly in their own hands at all
times’, China is equally trying to reach ‘technology security’by getting robots in its ‘own hands’.
By focussing on the drivers and spatial dynamics of robotization in China, we aim at ﬁlling an
important knowledge gap. Against the evolving global landscape, we analyse the complex mix of
structural and policy factors driving fast robotization across Chinese provinces. We proceed in three
steps. First, we produce evidence on the international geography and structural drivers of robot-
ization by distinguishing robot adoption from robot production and technological capability
preconditions. Against this backdrop, we then identify and analyse three main structural factors –
demand pull, supply push and capability preconditions – driving robotization and spatial dynamics
in China. We produce evidence on production and technological capabilities for robots across
Chinese provinces, including new estimates of the geographical distribution of robots within China.
Finally, we focus our attention on a fourth driving factor, that is, the extent to which national and
Andreoni et al. 179
province-based industrial policy (and their interaction with ‘structural drivers ’) are shaping ro-
botization across regions in China. We also assess the extent to which China ’s robotization policy
nested in MIC25 is increasingly boosted by the deepening of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI),
giving rise to a new multi-scalar industrial policy.
We ﬁnd that China is the robotized factory of the world, however, a factory that still relies on
foreign robot technologies heavily. This is why catching up in robotization is a major government
priority. Central government-led industrial policies have been increasingly aligned and com-
plemented with province-led initiatives since 2016 to localize technological innovation and exploit
potential regional agglomeration economies. We identify the emergence of four main robotizing
regions – that is, Guangdong, Yangtze-River-Delta (YRD), Beijing-Tianjin and Jilin-Liaoning.
Each one of them is trying to exploit its strengths and work on its weaknesses, while responding to
mounting competition across provinces. We ﬁnally found the emergence of three synergies linking
MIC25 and BRI and underpinning China ’s leadership in robot technologies: opening markets for
robots, shaping global industry and technology standards, ﬁnally directing ﬁnance towards robots
technology diffusion.
The paper is outlined as follows. We ﬁrst present materials and methods. We then identify and
provide cross-country evidence of structural factors driving robotization. We address these
structural drivers to explain emerging evidence on the disproportional distribution of robots across
regions in China, and emerging regional agglomerations. Against this bakdrop, we analyse the
evolution of national and province-based industrial policy for robotization in China. We conclude
by re ﬂecting on China ’s robotization trajectory and industrial policy lessons.
Theoretical approach, data and methods
In the analysis of technological trajectories – that is, technology innovation, diffusion and
adoption – both evolutionary and structural economics focus on demand-pull – both quantity and
quality – and supply-push dynamics – both technical change and changes in industrial structures
(Dosi, 1982 ). Both push and pull dynamics, and their interaction, are necessary to drive learning
within and across ﬁrms; they are cumulative and develop along patterns of complementarity in
investments and technological capabilities development ( Andreoni, 2014; Mowery and Rosenberg,
1989). Push and pull dynamics are also heterogenous across sectors ( Pavitt, 1984) and geographies
(Storper, 1997), resulting in sector-speciﬁc dynamics of change as well related spatial dynamics. We
build on this body of literature to guide our empirical investigation of robotization in China.
The literature on robotization has largely relied on the International Federation of Robotics (IFR)
datasets. The IFR provides annual data on the cumulated operational stock of industrial robots by
sectors, and the annual ﬂow of new robots for a large group of countries since 2005. As detailed in
Appendix B, in line with the literature, we follow the approach proposed by Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2020) to scale down robots adoption from the country to the province level. First, based on IFR
(2021), we estimate robots adoption across a selection of manufacturing sectors at a national level.
Second, building on from the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC web data warehouse
available at https://www.stats.gov.cn/english/), we estimate the distribution of the output from these
sectors across regions and the distribution of the employment across regions. Based on these three
estimates, we calculate the expected stock of industrial robots deployed across provinces and
province-level cities as a percentage of the country ’s total and its density per inhabitant. Estimates
are also reported in Appendix B .
The identi ﬁcation of manufacturing plants across China relied on a careful triangulation of
specialized press, technical/consultancy reports and the companies ’ ofﬁcial websites and their
180 Competition & Change 30(1)
ﬁnancial reports. Triangulation was needed as each one of these sources presents some ﬂaws.
Starting from Technavio (2019) as a baseline, we further re ﬁned our identi ﬁcation of robot
manufacturing plants in China by relying on ﬁrm-speciﬁc patents data. Patents are widely used as a
reliable measure of technology output ( Keller, 2004), and patent applicants a reliable proxy of the
ﬁrms producing that output ( OECD, 2009 ). We also rely on of ﬁcial reports from robots manu-
facturers and patent data to capture location of manufacturing plants in China, acquisitions of ﬁrms,
and technological-innovation capabilities.
While several factors such as ﬁnance and broader skills can act as preconditions of technology
adoption, we estimate the capability preconditions of robotization across Chinese regions only
based on patent data. This solution stresses the capability to process and develop technologies (see
Kimura, 2022 for an application to Chinese companies within the industrial robot GVC) and, thus,
helps single out the preconditions factor from the broader supply push driver. Speci ﬁcally, we
referred to patents applications under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) administered by the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) from the OECD, REGPA T database (July 2021).
We selected the list of patent classes related to the domain of robotics and automation, identifying
the class B25 J (manipulators; chambers provided with manipulation devices) as the technological
key to extract a list of PCT applications from the database. We ﬁnally collected longitudinal data on
applications according to the priority date, and allocated patents to Chinese regions to generate a
detailed and comprehensive regional map of the technology preconditions of robotization in China.
Finally, the industrial policy analysis builds on an in-depth review of policy strategies and
documents. Data from these documents have been triangulated and reviewed longitudinally to
assess reliability and accuracy.
Structural drivers and spatial dynamics of robotization: Locating the
China case
Demand-pull: Geography and sector-speci ﬁcity of robot adoption
Industrial robot adoption across countries is highly concentrated. In 2017, when the stock of robots
in operation reached its peak, 37 countries accounted for 95.9% of all robots in the world. The top
10 ‘robotised’countries accounted for 85.8% of the total, the top ﬁve alone for 74.8% of all robots.
The top ﬁve include three leading industrialized nations – Japan, the USA and Germany – and two
of the fastest industrialisers of the last century – South Korea and China. In 2020, the top ﬁve still
accounted for 73.1% ( Table 1 ). This geographical concentration re ﬂects a key structural factor
driving robotization, that is, the deployment of industrial robots is not homogenous across sectors.
Thus, countries (and regions) specialized in those sectors that deploy robots the most are also those
where robot users will exercise the strongest demand pull.
By 2017, 88% of industrial robots were deployed in the manufacturing sector, with automotive
accounting for the largest sectoral share of industrial robots (36.81%; 32.2% in 2020). Automotive
has always been the bedrock of manufacturing automation due to its high-volume production,
modularization and stability in product design in OEMs ( Anzolin and Andreoni, 2023 ). Electrical
and electronics (E&E) is the other leading sector for robot adoption (24.25%; 25.3% in 2020). The
production of micro-small parts at high speed, which characterizes this sector, makes automation
and robots highly productive and pro ﬁtable. Robots are capable of handling screens and coating
circuit boards and assembling connectors faultlessly. In 2020, the other two major sectors with more
robots in operation are metals (10.3%), and plastic and chemical products (6.3%). Together, these
four sectors account for 74% of the world operational stock of industrial robots in 2020. The fact that
Andreoni et al. 181
most industrial robots have been deployed in a few sectors and GVCs-stages so far, means that only
countries specialized in these sectors have robotized due to sector-speciﬁc demand-pulls (De Backer
et al., 2018 ).
Table 1 also shows a disaggregated country-sector matrix to capture sector-speci ﬁc demand-pull
dynamics for 2020. For the top ﬁve robotized countries, we calculated the distribution of robots
across manufacturing sectors, and we benchmark each country-sector cell in the matrix against the
average share across all countries. China and Korea score above average in the two leading sectors
of E&E which underpin digital technologies. Network analyses have found that the South-East
Asian region is where digital technologies GVCs are denser; hence, there is more inter-countries
demand pull for ﬁnal and intermediate components ( Andreoni et al., 2023 ). In South Korea, which
has the world ’s second highest density of industrial robots after Singapore (more than twice the
density in Japan and Germany, almost four times the density in the USA), robot adoption is driven
by country ’s catch up and regional agglomeration in electronics ( Lee, 2013 ). On the contrary, the
demand pull is stronger in automotive for Germany, USA and Japan (in the case of Germany, it
includes its European supply network; Cs´efalvay, 2020).
Supply-push: Geography and manufacturers of robots
While sector-speciﬁc robots users drive robot adoption across countries (and their regions) through a
demand-pull, the geographical distribution of robot producers is determined by a combination of
different supply push factors. These include: (i) path-dependency in robot production and tech-
nological capability leadership of certain countries (and their regions and ﬁrms); (ii) localization
investment decisions (R&D and production plants) of world-leading robot manufacturers in do-
mestic and foreign expanding markets; and (iii) new robot manufacturers attempting to compete
Table 1. Country-sectoral matrix and comparison between countries ’ total operational stocks of industrial
robots (2020) and PCT applications (2007 – 2018)* as percentage of world totals. Source: authors ’ elaboration
based on data from IFR (2021) and OECD, REGPAT database, July 2021.
Sector
Operational stock of industrial robots (2020) Share of world total
Automotive
(%)
Electric and
electronic
products
(%)
Metals and
machinery
(%)
Plastic and
chemical
products
(%)
Other
sectors
(%)
Operational
stock of
industrial
robots (2020)
(%)
Industrial
robot PCT
applications
(2007– 18)
(%)
Country
China 27.2 29.5 11.6 4.9 26.8 31.3 11.1
Japan 32.2 33.5 13.0 5.0 16.2 12.4 30.7
Rep. of
Korea
28.3 53.6 2.9 2.6 12.7 11.4 5.9
United
States
43.2 16.1 8.3 7.6 24.8 10.4 16.6
Germany 49.4 4.9 13.0 9.0 23.6 7.6 12.6
World 32.2 25.3 10.3 6.3 26.0 100.0 100.0
*IFR (2021) considers an industrial robot life cycle of 12 years. We count here integer patent applications over 12 years to
produce comparable ﬁgures.
182 Competition & Change 30(1)
with most established players in their domestic (or foreign) markets. Some of these supply push
factors interact with sector-speci ﬁc demand-pull dynamics discussed above.
The top 10 industrial robot manufacturers in th e world, with revenues ab ove US$1 billion are all
headquartered in advanced economies (Table 2). Among them, Mitsubishi Electric is a highly diversiﬁed
business group, while ABB specializes in robotics andﬂexible automation alongside power and heavy
electrical equipment. The other listed companies sp ecialize in industrial robots and intelligent auto-
mation systems. Four of them–Fanuc, ABB, KUKA and Yaskawa– had an estimated combined market
share of 57% in 2019. Japan is the country with the biggest concentration of robot manufacturers and
innovating robot technologies around three clusters in Kyoto City, Osaka City and Kobe City. With the
Table 2. Major industrial robot manufacturers in the world: segment revenue (2020), production facilities in
China (2020) and industrial robot PCT applications (2007 – 2018). Source: authors ’ elaboration based on
information from OECD, REGPAT database, July 2021, and companies ’ websites/ﬁnancial reports.
Company HQ country
Industrial robot
specialization
Segment
revenue
(billion USD,
2020)
Industrial robot
PCT applications
(2007– 18)
Production
facilities in
China (2020)
Mitsubishi
electric
Japan Factory automation and
robots
10.8 118 6
Omron
adept
Japan Mobile robots, industrial
robots and other
automation equipment
3.0 71 1
ABB Switzerland Robotics and automation 2.9 323 1
Kawasaki Japan Industrial robots for several
applications, including
dual-arm SCARA robots
working alongside humans
2.1 338 4
Fanuc Japan Arc welding robots, paint
robots, palletizing robots,
collaborative robots, and
mini robots, AI
1.8 78 4
Dürr Germany Assembling and painting
automation
1.8 33 1
Yaskawa Japan Industrial robots for welding,
packaging, assembly,
dispensing, material
handling, spot welding,
coating, and general
automation
1.2 140 5
Fuji Japan Compact industrial robots
(SCARA and multi-axes)
and mobility support
(health)
1.1 112 2
KUKA
(Midea
group)
Germany/
China
Six-axis robots in different
sizes, lightweight robots,
heat and dirt-resistant
robots, palletizing robots,
and shelf-mounted robots
1.0 268 2
Andreoni et al. 183
acquisition of KUKA (95%) by the Chinese companyMidea Group in 2016, China has become the only
emerging economy with a domestic world-leading system integrator in robotics.
The robot GVC involves several importers and exporters of robots. GVC integration offers some
opportunities to emerging countries trying to catch up in 4IR technologies ( De Backer et al., 2018 ;
Sturgeon, 2021; Anzolin et al., 2022 ; Kimura, 2022). This is particularly the case for China, where
the demand-pull of robot users has attracted the localization of robot production facilities since the
mid-2000s, and some R&D centres since 2017 ( ABB, 2020 ). In 2017, when China started ac-
celerating its robotization efforts, Japan was the leading net exporter of industrial robots in the
world, with a net export value of more than US$2 billion and China imported more than $1 billion
worth of robots (based on UN Comtrade data, product class 847,950 – i.e. ‘machinery & mechanical
appliances; industrial robots ’). By 2020, almost all leading robotics companies have built one or
more production facilities in China, alongside their sale and post-sale service networks.
Capability preconditions: Spatial distribution of technological capabilities
The localization decisions of both robots producing and using companies are affected by a third
factor: the presence of several foundational capability – especially technological – that act as
‘preconditions’ of robotization ( Andreoni et al., 2021 ; Anzolin et al., 2022 ). The adoption and
production of industrial robots presuppose productive organizations endowed with basic and in-
termediate production and technological capabilities (e.g. digital skills). These ﬁrm-level capa-
bilities also need enabling infrastructures, such as reliable electricity, and connectivity. Moreover, to
deliver productivity gains, robots require signi ﬁcant capital investment. While the cost of robots
declined by 20% in real terms between 1990 and 2006, robots remain expensive. Robot integration
and retroﬁtting of existing production lines and cells are costly processes, especially for SMEs, and
hence requires access to ﬁnance. These preconditions are disproportionally distributed across
countries, as revealed by several indicators of human and productive capabilities, industrial
competitiveness and institutional development ( Fagerberg et al., 2007 ; Crescenzi et al., 2012 ).
In 2017, only 25% of new robots installed in China were produced domestically by either inter-
national or domestic robot manufacturers. Moreover, Chinese companies managed to supply only
components for the robot corpus (accounting for only 22% of the cost structure of a typical robot). More
complex components of robot technologies such as – controllers, servo motors and reduction gears–
accounting for over 70% of the cost of a typical robot, were produced by foreign suppliers (Made in
China, 2025). Despite challenges in building the necessary technological capabilities to robotize, patent
data analysis reveals a fast-changing scenario (Figure 1). Since 2016, China has recorded a dramatic
acceleration in PCT applications. While Japan remains the global leader in PCT applications for robot
technologies, China is overtaking the USA in patents to become the second technological leader in robot
technologies. As discussed in Kimura (2022), an acceleration in PCT applications is evidence of fast
development of technological capabilities in robotization.
Structural drivers and spatial dynamics of robotization in China: Results
Figure 2 summarizes the evidence on structural drivers of robotization in China, speci ﬁcally, sector-
speciﬁc demand pull (Panel 2.A), supply push and manufacturing capacity (Panel 2.B) and
evolution in technology preconditions (Panel 2.C). These are presented longitudinally and in
relation to the evolution in robots policy in China (Panel 2.D). This information is complemented by
Figure 3 where information on the same structural drivers is mapped out by regions (Panel 3.A).
Four robotics hubs are also highlighted (Panel 3.B) and discussed below.
184 Competition & Change 30(1)
Demand pull by sector and regional distribution
The adoption of industrial robots in China has been pulled by the automotive sector since 2012
(20%, 16% in 2020), although E&E industry recently overtook automotive (7% in 2012, 17% in
2020). This re ﬂects the massive expansion of the E&E in China ( Figure 2(A) ). Miscellaneous
activities persist in absorbing a substantial number of robots (15% in 2020). At regional level, we
found that robotization across regions is highly heterogenous. Three factors explain this high
heterogeneity. First, as expected, the width of robotization at the regional level is driven by the
distribution of manufacturing and the presence of industries where robots are widely adopted.
Second, this relation is clearer for the regions of extensive robotization; that is, those agglomerating
many industrial robots as they feature the largest numbers of employees in manufacturing, such as
Guangdong, Jiangsu and Zhejiang. Third, the distribution is fuzzier for regions where a higher share
of industrial robots than employees are agglomerated (small numbers but high densities of industrial
robots), such as Tianjin, Chongqing, Jilin and Shanghai.
Overall, robots adoption across regions in China ( Figure 3(A)) appears to con ﬁrm the relevance
of the sector-speci ﬁc demand pull as the stocks of industrial robots are relatively larger where the
E&E industry is more concentrated (output shares generally beyond 10%), while densities are
higher where the automotive industry agglomerates more (output share of 7 –10%). Guangdong is
one exception, featuring both a large stock and high density of robots, due to high concentration of
the E&E industry (42.2% of mobile phones and 57.2% of television sets) and automotive (12.4%).
Supply push by domestic and international robot manufacturers, and
regional distribution
While domestic demand for robots remains higher than domestic supply, robot manufacturing
capabilities have developed over the last three decades ( Table 3). The national leading company,
Estun, was established in the early 1990s and over the years specialized in ‘CNC robotics ’
combining Computer Numerical Control machines with advanced robotics; this was made possible
with the acquisition of technology assets abroad (Figure 2(B)). The second-largest company, Siasun,
was established in 2000 as a spin-off of the Shenyang Institute of Automation of the Chinese
Figure 1. PCT applications by country and year, 2001 – 2018 (applicants, integer counts). Source: authors ’
elaboration on data from OECD, REGPAT database, July 2021.
Andreoni et al. 185
Figure 2. Structural and policy layers of robotization in China. Panel A: Adoption. Operational stock of
industrial robots by main sector of deployment, 2001 – 2020. Source: authors ’ elaboration based on IFR
(2021). Panel B: Production. Establishment of major Chinese industrial robot manufacturers and major
acquisitions of foreign companies in the robotics industry by Chinese players, 2001 – 2020. Source: authors ’
elaboration based on multiple sources. Panel C: Technology. Industrial robot PCT applications in China by
applicant origin: domestic and af ﬁliated applicants, 2001 – 2018 (integer counts). Source: authors ’ elaboration
on data from OECD, REGPAT database, July 2021. Panel D: Policy. Industrial policy framework for robotization
in China, 2001 – 2020.
186 Competition & Change 30(1)
Academy of Sciences. Despite their growth, all domestic players operate at a substantially smaller
scale of revenues than the world-leading robot manufacturers (see Table 2 for a comparison).
Since 2015, acquisition of foreign companies has played an increasing role (Figure 2(B)), starting
with CMA Robotics, a small Italian company becoming part of Efort. Italian and German companies
Figure 3. Robotization in China. Panel A: Robotizing regions. Adoption patterns (polygons), manufacturers
(bubbles) and technologies (squares). Panel B: Robotization hubs. Summary information and local policy
initiatives. Source: authors ’ elaboration on information from various sources. (A) Robotizing regions. (B)
Robotization hubs.
Andreoni et al. 187
were the main targets of these acquisitions throughout 2016 and 2017. The acquisition of the
German KUKA by Midea Group in 2016 represents the most relevant case. Alongside national
players, global leading companies such as ABB, Fanuc and Yaskawa, operate in China through local
subsidiaries (see Table 2 above on number of these production facilities in China).
From our mapping of both major domestic and foreign manufactures of robots across Chinese
regions, we found some signs of robot manufacturers agglomeration (Figure 3(A)). First, the overall
number of manufacturers (bubble size) tend to localize according to the density of robots demanded.
Second, the localization of foreign manufacturers appears as feebly but positively associated with an
increasing density of industrial robots. The domestic manufacturers as well as foreign-owned
facilities localize in eight regions. However, co-localization is quite weak, occurring in only four
regions: Guangdong, Beijing, Shanghai and Jiangsu (bubble colour). The largest concentration of
manufacturing facilities is in Shanghai (ten), followed by Jiangsu (eight), and Guangdong (seven).
And this concentration is mainly fostered by the localization of foreign-owned facilities: eight out of
ten in Shanghai, six out of eight in Jiangsu and ﬁve out of seven in Guangdong (see Appendix B for
more details).
Technological capabilities preconditions development across regions
Frontier-technology capabilities – measured as number of PCT applications in robotics – started
emerging in China in 2001 ( Figure 2(C) , domestic applicants), 20 years after the ﬁrst patents
worldwide (Japan in 1979, followed by Germany and USA). Nonetheless, China reported an
increasing number of applications since 2009 and a real upsurge since 2015. In addition, these
technological capabilities have been progressively supplemented by those acquired abroad
Table 3. Major Chinese industrial robot manufacturers in China: number of production facilities (2020) and
PCT applications (2007 – 2018). Source: authors ’ elaboration based on information from OECD, REGPAT
database, July 2021, ﬁnancial and companies ’ websites.
Company
Year
established
Industrial robot
specialization
Total
revenue
(billion USD,
2020)
Industrial robot
PCT applications
(2007– 18)
Production
facilities in China
(2020)
Estun 1993 Automation, motion
control, industrial
robots for a variety of
applications
0.47 16 3
Siasun (China
Academy of
Sciences)
2000 Industrial, mobile,
collaborative and
service robots, smart
logistics
0.42 4 4
Geek+ 2015 Autonomous mobile
robots
0.30 5 1
PartnerX 1996 Motion arms (brand
EVOX)
0.25 8 1
Efort 2007 Mini, painting, and
collaborative robots,
various payloads
robots
0.17 1 5
188 Competition & Change 30(1)
(afﬁliated applicants). By 2017, China generated 21% of the world frontier technologies in robotics.
An astonishing result if compared to the fact that between 2001 and 2008 it was only 1% ( Figure 1).
Despite this rapid growth, technological capabilities measured by patents remain concentrated in
a few regions ( Figure 3(A) ). These are: Guangdong (390), Jiangsu, (146) and Beijing (114),
followed by Shanghai (62) and Zhejiang (35). These are also the regions where we mapped 30 out of
40 robot production facilities (11 out of 14 domestic-owned and 19 out of 26 foreign-owned). The
capability to supply more advanced technologies in China is critically driven, indeed, by ag-
glomerations around foreign and indigenous ‘seeds’of supply push, which are often associated with
foreign companies and, more recently, indigenous ones ( Prodi et al., 2018 , 2020).
Regional robot hubs
By triangulating evidence on the structural drivers of robotization across Chinese regions
(Figure 3(B) ), we have identi ﬁed four main regional robot hubs.
The ﬁrst hub is Guangdong: an extensive manufacturing hub in China, where 22% of China ’
employment in manufacturing is concentrated. In 2020, the industrial base pulled 20% of the
national stock of industrial robots; attracted investments in one out of ﬁve robots production fa-
cilities (28% of which domestic-owned). The density of robots remains lower than in other regions;
this is mainly due to the regional concentration of E&E industries (especially, mobile phones and
television sets accounting around 50% of China). A comparable concentration emerges for the
technological capabilities in robotics (45% over the country ’s total of PCT applications), suggesting
that Guangdong is the forerunner of a demand-pull extensive pattern of robotization.
A second hub is the Yangtze-River-Delta (YRD) region, which includes Shanghai, Jiangsu,
Zhejiang and Anhui. Overall, this hub agglomerates 22% of the stock of industrial robots and 27%
of the national employment in manufacturing, with a dis-homogeneous density ranging between
0.2 in Anhui and 1 in Shanghai. The wide area hosts 23 out of 40 robot manufacturing facilities
(40% of which are domestic owned, only 20% in Shanghai). Furthermore, it is the second provider
of domestic robot technologies (30%). Thus, the robotization pattern in the YRD appears to be one
of supply pushed robotization. The centre of the hub, Shanghai, features more intensive roboti-
zation, which is attractive for foreign ﬁrms, and pulls the development trajectory of the three
surrounding provinces.
The third hub, located in Beijing and the linked region of Tianjin, exhibits an intensive pattern of
robotization: 6% of the national stock of industrial robots turns into one of the highest densities of
industrial robots (0.6 in Tianjin and 0.9 in Beijing) among the Chinese regions (manufacturing
accounts for less than 5% of the country ’s total). Despite its small size, the region agglomerates 8%
of the manufacturing facilities and 14% of PCT applications, suggesting that supply, and especially
technology-relevant activities, are the main drivers of robotization.
The fourth and last hub is located across the provinces of Jilin and Liaoning. It can be considered
one of the original sites of robotization in China, since Jilin hosts one of the largest agglomerations
in automotive (14%), while Liaoning hosts the headquarters of one national leading robot man-
ufacturer (Siasun in Shenyang). Siasun operates the only production facility in the region. The
overall concentration of manufacturing activities is relatively low (4% of country ’s employment)
absorbing 6% of the national stock of robots, mainly triggered by the intensive pattern of ro-
botization in automotive (the density of robots peaks at 0.7 in Jilin). Also, the generation of frontier
technologies is limited (3% of PCT applications), suggesting that robotization is demand-pulled
mostly.
Andreoni et al. 189
Industrial policy driving robotization in China: Evolution
The Chinese government has forcefully targeted industrial robotization using its full package of
industrial and innovation policy instruments since the National High-Tech R&D programme
(863 Programme) issued in 1986 ( Liu et al., 2011 ; Andreoni and Tregenna, 2020 ; Wen and Zhao,
2020). However, China’s catching-up effort – moving from robot adoption to robot production and
technological global leadership – has been mainly associated with the Twelfth Five-Year Plan
(2011–2015). The Thirteenth Five-Year Plan (2016 –2020) has further advanced China ’s approach
by emphasizing the importance of promoting a ‘number of world-class development clusters for
strategic emerging industries ’. While this development has opened the way to several province-led
industrial policy experiments and initiatives promoting robotization, the central government has
retained a pivotal role in framing and governing a complex mix of national level and place-based
central government-led industrial policy ( Chen and Naughton, 2016 ; Naughton, 2018 ). Table 4
summarizes the development of this multi-scalar industrial policy framework for robotization in
China focussing on the main steps, target and goals.
In 2015, with the launch of Made in China 2025 (MIC25) – a major plan to improve the
competitiveness, innovation, technology, quality, reliability, and ‘green-ness’ of China ’s
manufacturing sector – intelligent manufacturing and robots have received even more attention ( Li,
2018). Robots have been recognized as the technology that will allow China to address the so-called
‘double-press’, according to Miao Wei, MIIT Minister. The double-press means competing with
developed countries in advanced technologies and with developing countries for cheap labour.
MIC25 is by far the most ambitious programme in Chinese history when it comes to robots. It aims
to upgrade China ’s manufacturing industry by making China ‘the world ’s largest producer of
industrial robots and to master technologies for key components, a longstanding challenge for
China’s robotic industry ’(authors’translation).
The Robotics Industry Development Plan (2016 –2020) reports that China is still a relative
latecomer. China still depends on imports for core components of industrial robots – that is,
controllers, decelerators and servomotors. Chinese-made core components tend to be larger in size
and lower in output power, especially compared with Japanese-made robots. Three- and four-axis
machines still tend to be the most diffused, while six-axis robots capable of performing complex
tasks like assembly, disassembly and welding are relatively less common.
Within the MIC25 and the Robotics Industry Development Plan (2016–2020), the industrial policy
package includes instruments operating at the national and provincial levels. At the national level, the
government relies on ﬁve main policy instruments: subsidies ( Cheng et al., 2019 ; Lin, 2018); ﬁscal
incentives, such as the State Council ’s announcement of cutting more than 60 billion yuan
(US$8.78 billion) worth of taxes for smalland micro-enterprises and high-techﬁrms in order to reduce
its operating costs and spur innov ation; promoting (and approving) company acquisition; promoting
joint ventures (De Graaff, 2020); creating robotics centres and parks (Zenglein and Holzmann, 2019).
Since 2015, Chinese provinces have started announcing and implementing a variety of province-
led industrial policy packages for robotization. Some of these policy instruments target increasing
robot adoption, while others have increasingly targeted acquisition, development and agglomeration
of productive and technological capabilities in robots. The overarching national industrial policy
framework for robotization is meant to provide industrial policy alignment and governance co-
ordination, as there is a recognition of their strategic importance in achieving targeted goals ( Chang
and Andreoni, 2020), and offers the main architecture for advancing China’s national interests in the
age of strategic competition ( Singh, 2023 ). Table 5 provide most striking examples of central-led
initiatives and province-led initiatives for the four robotization hubs.
190 Competition & Change 30(1)
Provinces have implemented different schemes and incentive packages to become the biggest robot
hub of China. In some cases, regional policies mirro r the national-led policy initiatives; indeed, all
provinces attempt to reach the High- and New-Technology Enterprise (HNTE) status that guarantees a
signiﬁcant reduction of the Corporate Income Tax (CIT) rate to encourage investments in high-tech and
R&D. In other cases, province-led initiatives reﬂect the structural speciﬁcities of the region in terms of
demand pull, supply push and capability preconditions and governments target their speci ﬁc oppor-
tunities and constraints. For example, some regional governments have set up investment capital funds
Table 4. Industrial policy framework for robotization in China. Source: authors based on policy documents.
Plan/action Target and goals
Twelfth ﬁve-year plan (MST, 2011 – 2015) Reducing the overdependence on imported high-end
equipment and its key components for domestic
production; development of speci ﬁc technologies,
including robotics, sensors, industrial communication
networks and controllers
Guideline on promoting the development of the
industrial robot industry (MIIT, 2013 – 2020)
Tackling four weaknesses: a small industry base and reliance
on imports for key components; China ’s common
service platform standards and personnel; market
competitiveness of country ’s own brands; market
competition
Goals: developing three to ﬁve globally competitive robot
manufacturers; creating eight to 10 industrial clusters for
the industry; reaching a 45% domestic market share for
Chinese high-end robots; and increasing robot
penetration to 100 per 10,000 workers
Thirteenth ﬁve-year national economic and social
development plan (2016 – 2020)
Aligning the guideline to sectoral industrial policies
Made in China 2025 (2015 – 2025) Owning the intellectual property rights (IPRs) of key
components of industrial robots; becoming a leader in
the development of next-generation robots; having one
or two Chinese-owned companies ranked among the
world top ﬁve companies
Goals: replacing the import of industrial robots with
domestically produced ones by 50% of total robots
installed by 2020, and 70% of those installed by 2025; in
the area of robot core components, moving from 50% of
replacement by 2020 to 70% in 2025 and a projected
80% by 2030
Robotics industry development plan (MIIT,
NDRC, MF, 2016 – 2020)
Promoting automation massively, including in the service
sector; building in 10 types of industrial robots,
performing an array of services, and even programming
themselves
Goals: annual industrial robot production of Chinese
brands of up to 100,000 units, with 50,000 of these being
six-axis industrial robots; achieving a volume of sales of
service robots of over 30 billion yuan (US$4.7 billion)
New generation AI development plan (2016 –
2020)
Focussing on core components, hardware and software
interfaces and standards for smart service robots and
smart industrial robots
Andreoni et al. 191
Table 5. Central-led and province-led policies in the four robotization hubs. Source: authors based on policy
documents.
Hub Central-led policies Province-led policies
Jilin–
Liaoning
In 2018, the MIIT announced the establishment
of a national Robotics centre in the
Shenyang. The new centre focuses on
tackling common bottlenecks across
domestic robot producers, such as human-
machine interaction technologies and
compliant control. This centre is one of the
15 national centres focussing on emerging
technologies, planned in MIC25 before
2020. The new centre joined several
institutions, some of which are part of the
so-called China Robot Industry Alliance, a non-
proﬁt national industry association
Policies in the northern provinces focus on the
presence of the national robot innovation
center, Harbin institute of technology, and
other companies and institutions. It is worth
noting that Siasun is owned by the China
academy of sciences, which is one of the
funders of the national robot innovation
centre. This governance structure guarantees
ﬁnancial commitment and alignment with
government industrial strategy direction
Guangdong As part of the Midea ’s acquisition of KUKA, a
robot park is due to be built in Shunde,
where Midea is located. This park will have a
manufacturing capacity of 100,000 robots
and will focus on six-axes robots and new
robot design for Chinese industries
The Industrial Restructuring and Upgrading of
Guangdong Province Three-year Action Plan
(2015 to 2017) focuses on developing
cutting-edge industrial technologies and
improving product quality, as well as
manufacturing process ef ﬁciency. Policy
measures to overcome gaps in capability
preconditions for robotization include
promotion of incubators and accelerators;
innovative entrepreneurship schemes,
including ﬁnancial support for development
of R&D centres within large-scale
enterprises, and assuring the growing rate of
investments in R&D departments. Finally, it
aims to create a complete robot
manufacturing industrial ecosystem via
promoting demonstration extension services
for industrial robot adoption
The Development Plan of Intellectual
Manufacturing of Guangdong Province (2015 to
2025) develops the idea of demonstration
bases further and gives them a speci ﬁc
directionality. Guangdong province issues
subsidies to companies of 15% to 30% of the
robotic approach cost to help local
manufacturers automate. Beyond robot
adoption, the Foshan district is emerging as
the most important robot production hub
where Midea and KUKA have located three
new ventures, and ABB located new
investments
(continued)
192 Competition & Change 30(1)
and allocated resources to support robotization v ia targeted supply side initiatives (Guangdong and
Beijing in particular), while others have done so via demand-side measures (YRD).
Shifting-up a gear: New multi-scalar industrial policy and BRI
China felt short on several goals of the Robotics Industry Development Plan (2016 –2020). Do-
mestic production of robots was planned to reach 50% in 2020, China stopped at 29.2%. This gap
can be mainly attributed to the very ambitious target set in 2016, both in terms of import substitution
and wide range of applications targeted, and ultimately to the fact that learning cycles in advanced
robots technologies are relatively long. In December 2021, the MIIT launched the Fourteenth Five-
Year Plan for the Development of Robot Industry whose long-term goal is to develop a domestic
Table 5. (continued)
Hub Central-led policies Province-led policies
Beijing–
Tianjin
The government is leveraging the presence of AI
companies that are developing in the area to
attract 10 R&D headquarters and 10 leading
robot companies ( Xinhua, 2017 ). Several
other targeted programmes have been also
introduced. For example, with the
programme on intelligent manufacturing and
Robotics research, in accordance with the
‘Comprehensive Plan for the Enhancing the
Establishment of Beijing as a National Science,
Technology and Innovation Centre (Guo Fa
[2016] No. 52) , and the relevant municipal-
level 5-year plan (Jing Zheng Fa [2016] No.
44), in 2018 the Beijing Municipal science and
technology commission started funding a
series of research projects to enhance the
city’s innovation capabilities in the ﬁeld of
intelligent manufacturing and robotics ’
(China Innovation Funding, 2020 )
YRD The ‘Made in Shanghai ’ initiative is a
comprehensive set of policies (subsidies,
R&D centres, improved business
environment, specialized districts, etc.)
targeting both foreign high-tech and domestic
companies. The policy aims to develop an
innovation- and technology-driven 4IR
cluster ( Shanghai Municipal Commission,
2019). Thanks to the opportunities given by
the Made in Shanghai Initiative, in 2021, ABB
decided to invest US$150 million into one of
the most advanced Robotics factory in China
(ABB, 2020 ). Shanghai has also grown its
aspiration to become an international hub for
robotization, re ﬂecting a new international
industrial policy scale
Andreoni et al. 193
industry able to compete on international markets by 2035. In January 2023, the Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology translated this renewed aspiration in the ‘Robot + Application
Action Plan ’. This new plan focuses on ten key application areas and aims at achieving break-
throughs in more than 100 innovative applications, and over 200 model use cases. Moreover, ‘It also
emphasized efforts to build a collaborative innovation system for robot production and application
and speed up the development and promotion of robot application standards ’2.
With the 14th plan and other policy documents which have advocated for a ‘Digital Silk Road ’
(China’s National Informatization Strategy), the multi-scalar industrial policy approach is in-
creasingly including an international level to the national and province ones discussed above. The
BRI provides a strategic platform to project domestic industries and their scale-intensive capa-
bilities, leveraging international rising demand for technologies and shaping regional and global
markets in speci ﬁc sectors and technology domains ( Calabrese et al., 2024 ). While it is dif ﬁcult to
identify ‘the key scalar moments at which big policy ideas are transformed into new development
geographies’ (Klinger and Muldavin, 2019 ; see also Jones and Zeng, 2019 ), there are signs of
emerging synergies between MIC25 and BRI. Speci ﬁcally, BRI offers China ’s robotization efforts
an important channel through which the ambitious goals of the MIC25 and the latest Plan for
robotization can be reached. From our policy analysis and emerging contributions, we can identify
three main mechanisms through which MIC25 will be boosted by a stronger alignment with BRI.
First, BRI opens new markets and export routes for robots and related digital production
technologies. Zheng et al. (2021) show how the overall value chain connection between China and
the Silk Road countries has been rising since 2001, with Southeast Asia being the most connected
region, followed by Central and Eastern European countries. Li et al. (2022) provide evidence of the
emerging core-periphery structure in the BRI industrial robots trade network. They also ﬁnd that
‘the Belt & Road industrial robot trade relationship shows a feature of steady growth, and the
accessibility and trade efﬁciency of the intraregional trade are constantly improved’. A central factor
shaping industrial robots trade networks within BRI, according to this study, is the technical distance
of industrial robots. The technology gap also in ﬂuences the potential productivity spillover effect of
robots adoption in BRI host countries ( Razzaq et al., 2021 ). Given the scale-intensive nature of
robots manufacturing and its industries of adoption, BRI is expected to provide increasing market
access for Chinese manufacturers of ﬁnal robots and intermediate components.
Trade data seems to corroborate such emerging pattern and potential BRI dividend ( Table 6).
Between 2022 and 2023, Chinese exports of robots to BRI countries (BRIs) increased by 123%,
against 48% for non-BRIs. By 2023, BRIs are the ﬁrst market for China robots. Export of robots to
BRIs has increased also in relative terms when we compare export of all commodities and a broader
group of machineries which included industrial robots until 2021. Export of robots is a good proxy
of the other two channels through which BRI contributes to robotization. This is because robot
exports are a vector for exporting technology standards and services. Furthermore, being a capex-
intensive technology, export of robots is often bundled with export ﬁnancing and licensing contracts
operated through various specialized ﬁnancial institutions.
BRI offers China a platform to shape global industry and technology standards around the
MIC25 digital framework, including digital production technologies like robots as well as related
infrastructure connectivity technologies like 5G. Increasing market access allows Chinese com-
panies to shape digital production technology adoption across ﬁrms and sectors of emerging
economies. To remain competitive in digital global value chains, ﬁrms in these countries are looking
for digital retro ﬁtting of their production facilities and the fastest and most cost-competitive way.
China can increasingly provide such technology systems, and in doing so set the technical standards
and inter-operability technology standards. As stressed by Choudary (2020) : ‘Much like Google
194 Competition & Change 30(1)
established itself as a dominant player in the smartphone ecosystem, China is attempting to do the
same in an increasingly digital geopolitical landscape. [ … ] China ’s National Informatization
Strategy calls upon China’s internet companies to go out into the world and support the creation of a
“Digital Silk Road”— which refers to the export of Chinese technology alongside the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI), China ’s massive global infrastructure investment project. The “Digital Silk Road ”
is China ’s bet on a country-as-a-platform strategy ’.
Finally, BRI is a platform to direct exportﬁnance towards robots adoption and diffusion. Since BRI,
nearly 70% of Chinese overseas lending has been directed to state-owned companies, state-owned
banks, special purpose vehicles, joint ventures and private sector institutions (AidData, 2021). One factor
driving Chinese technology competitiveness abroad is its capacity to package technology andﬁnancial
solutions. As discussed inCamba (2020), China channels two types ofﬁnance to the global south. State-
backed capital which imposes a development model by modifying ‘local orders’,a n d ﬂexible capital
interested in extricating itself from the conditions imposed on it in China, and looking for new venues of
accumulation and novel ways of organizing production. Different streams of ﬁnance coupling export
technology trade offer different direct (and indirect) channels through which Chi n aa sas t a t ea n dC h i n e s e
companies can gain competitive advantage in the BRI.
Conclusions
Robotization in China and across its regions has been driven by a set of interacting structural
factors – demand pull, supply push and capability preconditions – as well a key policy factor –
industrial policy. The paper presented the ﬁrst regional evidence on drivers of robotization in China
and highlighted how demand pull, supply push and preconditions have resulted in regional het-
erogeneity and the emergence of robotization hubs. We have stressed how industrial policy has also
played a key role in aligning underlying structural dynamics of demand, supply and localization.
The study identiﬁed the emergence of four main robotizing regions. Each one of them is trying to
exploit its strengths and work on its weaknesses, while responding to mounting competition across
provinces. Guangdong province needs robotization, given its well-developed industrial agglomerations
in electronic and automotive. Leveraging this demand-pull strength, place-based policies are focussing
on pushing both robots’adoption and domestic production. On the contrary, YRD is relying on relatively
Table 6. Exports of robots from China to World and BRIs, HS classi ﬁcation. Source: authors based on
UNCOMTRADE and Green Belt and road initiative center, https://green-bri.org/.
2017 2022 2023
All commodities World (billions
USD)
2263.37 3593.60 3379.75
BRIs (billions USD) 781.96 1415.84 1372.62
BRIs (share) 34.55% 39.40% 40.61%
847950 machinery and mechanical appliances; industrial
robots (H5)
World (billions
USD)
0.21 0.41 0.45
BRIs (billions USD) 0.10 0.19 0.21
BRIs (share) 47.34% 47.63% 45.48%
842870 industrial robots (H6) World (billions
USD)
NA 0.12 0.21
BRIs (billions USD) NA 0.05 0.11
BRIs (share) 41.13% 51.29%
Andreoni et al. 195
less targeted policies and leveraging its international attractiveness. Differently from both Guangdong
and YRD, Beijing sees in the interaction between AI and Robotics an opportunity to overcome its
manufacturing weaknesses by emerging as a technological-innovation hub.
National and place-based central government-led policies have been increasingly aligned and
complemented with province-led initiatives since 2016. Our analysis revealed some differences in
industrial policy approaches across regions. While Guangdong and Beijing and the Northern
provinces have mainly relied on supply side incentives and their leverage of national funds, policies
in YRD seem to be more focused on the demand side. Being the most advanced area in China, YRD
provinces have all of the capability preconditions to attract and host robotics companies: high-level
human capital, a developed high-tech machinery industry and a network of local and foreign
suppliers. Automotive and electronic industries also guarantee high demand because the cost of
labour in the area is the highest in China. Therefore, provinces in YRD do not have and need a
detailed set of policies, as we have seen for the Guangdong province on top of programmes
promoted at National level for robotics.
We ﬁnally emphasized the emerging synergies between China ’s national industrial policy for
robotization and its BRI, and the emergence of a new multi-scalar industrial policy. Even though the
links between these policies remain often implicit, there are clear emerging synergies that China will
leverage to achieve its ambitious robotization goals. We emphasized three mechanisms through
which BRI will be increasingly play a role in boosting Chinese domestic robotization effort –
opening markets for robots; shaping global industry and technology standards; directing ﬁnance
towards robots technology diffusion. By developing a multi-scalar policy alignment between
national and province-led industrial policy under the MIC25 on the one hand and the BRI on the
other, China is set to write a new chapter in the international political economy of robotization and
further establish its position as the rising global leader in robotization.
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iDs
Antonio Andreoni  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9389-0927
Federico Frattini  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8490-4159
Giorgio Prodi  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3957-4939
Supplemental Material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.
Notes
1. The empirical and policy analysis in our paper does not include Taiwan, Province of China.
2. Source: https://english.www.gov.cn/statecouncil/ministries/202,301/20/content_WS63c9d296c6d0a757729e5e28.
html
196 Competition & Change 30(1)
References
ABB (2020) Annual Report 2019 . Zurich, Switzerland: ABB Ltd.
Acemoglu D and Restrepo P (2020) Robots and jobs: evidence from US labor markets. Journal of Political
Economy 128(6): 2188 –2244.
AidData (2021) Banking on the Belt and Road. Available at:https://www.aiddata.org/publications/banking-on-
the-belt-and-road (accessed 1 October 2021).
Andreoni A (2014) Structural learning. Embedding discoveries and the dynamics of production. Structural
Change and Economic Dynamics 29: 58 –74.
Andreoni A and Tregenna F (2020) Escaping the middle-income technology trap: a comparative analysis of in-
dustrial policies in China, Brazil and South Africa.Structural Change and Economic Dynamics54: 324–340.
Andreoni A, Chang H-J and Labrunie M (2021) Natura non facit saltus: challenges and opportunities for digital
industrialisation across developing countries. European Journal of Development Research 33: 330–370.
Andreoni A, Anzolin G, Labrunie M, et al (2023) Unveiling Structure and Dynamics of Global Digital
Production Technology Networks . London: SOAS University of London. SOAS Working paper 261.
Anzolin G and Andreoni A (2023) Robotising, but how? Evidence from the automotive sector in South Africa.
Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 34(5): 820 –837.
Anzolin G, Andreoni A and Zanfei A (2022) What is driving robotization in the automotive value chain?
Technovation 115: 102476.
Calabrese L, Jenkins R and Lombardozzi L (2022) The belt and road initiative and dynamics of structural
transformation European Journal of Development Research . DOI: 10.1057/s41287-024-00644-x.
Camba A (2020) The sino-centric capital export regime: state-backed and ﬂexible capital in the Philippines.
Development and Change 51(4): 970 –997.
Chang H-J and Andreoni A (2020) Industrial policy in the 21st century.Development and Change51(2): 324–351.
Chen L and Naughton B (2016) An institutionalized policy-making mechanism: China ’s return to techno-
industrial policy. Research Policy 45(10): 2138 –2152.
Cheng H, Jia R, Li D, et al. (2019) The rise of robots in China.The Journal of Economic Perspectives33(2): 71–88.
China Innovation Funding (2020) Funding programmes in Beijing. https://chinainnovationfunding.eu/funding-
programmes-beijing/
Choudary SP (2020) China’s Country-As-Platform Strategy for Global In ﬂuence. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution.
Crescenzi R, Rodriguez-Pose A and Storper M (2012) The territorial dynamics of innovation in China and
India. Journal of Economic Geography 12(5): 1055 –1085.
Cs´efalvay Z (2020) Robotization in central and eastern Europe. European Planning Studies 28(8): 1534–1553.
De Backer K, Destefano T, Menon C, et al. (2018) Industrial robotics and the global organisation of production.
In OECD STI . Paris: OECD, Working Papers.
De Graaff N (2020) China Inc. goes global. Transnational and national networks of China ’s globalizing
business elite. Review of International Political Economy 27(2): 208 –233.
Delera M, Pietrobelli C, Calza E, et al. (2022) Does value chain participation facilitate the adoption of Industry
4.0 technologies in developing countries? World Development 152: 105788.
Dosi G (1982) Technological paradigms and technological trajectories. Research Policy 11(3): 147 –162.
Du L and Lin W (2022) Does the application of industrial robots overcome the Solow paradox? Technology in
Society 68: 101932.
Du Y and Wei X (2022) Technological change and unemployment: evidence from China. Applied Economics
Letters 29(9): 851 –854.
Duan D, Chen S, Feng Z, et al. (2023) Industrial robots and ﬁrm productivity. Structural Change and Economic
Dynamics 67: 388 –406.
Andreoni et al. 197
Fagerberg J, Srholec M and Knell M (2007) The competitiveness of nations: why some countries prosper while
others fall behind. World Development 35(10): 1595 –1620.
Fan H, Hu Y and Tang L (2021) Labor costs and the adoption of robots in China.Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization 186: 608 –631.
Ferraz JC, Kupfer D, Torracca J, et al. (2020) Snapshots of a state ofﬂux: how Brazilian industrialﬁrms differ in the
adoption of digital technologies and policy implications.Journal of Economic Policy Reform23(4): 390–407.
Fu T and Cheng Y (2022) Regionalisation or domesticalisation? Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and
Society 15(2): 343 –365.
Fu X(M), Bao Q, Xie H, et al. (2021) Diffusion of industrial robotics and inclusive growth. Journal of Business
Research 122: 670 –684.
Gasparetto A and Scalera L (2019) A brief history of industrial robotics in the 20th century. Advances in
Historical Studies 08(1): 24 –35.
Graetz G and Michaels G (2018) Robots at work. The Review of Economics and Statistics 100(5): 753–768.
Han F and Mao X (2023) Arti ﬁcial intelligence empowers enterprise innovation: evidence from China ’s
industrial enterprises. Applied Economics :1 –16. DOI: 10.1080/00036846.2023.2289916.
Hong L, Liu X, Zhan H, et al. (2022) Use of industrial robots and Chinese enterprises’export quality upgrading:
evidence from China. Journal of International Trade & Economic Development 31(6): 860 –875.
Hong L, Luo R and Wu Y (2023) Industrial robot application and export product scope: empirical evidence
from China. Applied Economics Letters 1–7. DOI: 10.1080/13504851.2023.2289405.
Hu S, Lin K, Liu B, et al. (2023) Does robotization improve the skill structure? Applied Economics 56:
3415–3430. DOI: 10.1080/00036846.2023.2206623.
Huang K, Liu Q and Tang C (2023) Which ﬁrms beneﬁt from robot adoption? Evidence from China. Journal of
Asian Economics 86: 101612.
IFR (2021) World Robotics 2021 – Industrial Robots. Frankfurt, Germany: International Federation of Robotics.
Johnson C (1982) MITI and the Japanese Miracle . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Jones L and Zeng J (2019) Understanding China ’s ‘Belt and Road Initiative ’: beyong ‘grand strategy’to state
transformation analysis. Third World Quarterly 40: 1415 –1439.
Keller W (2004) International technology diffusion. Journal of Economic Literature 42(3): 752 –782.
Kimura K (2022) How do ﬁrms specialize?Journal of Chinese Economics and Business Studies20(4): 339–353.
Klinger JM and Muldavin JSS (2019) New geographies of development: grounding China ’s global integration.
Territory, Politics, Governance 7(1): 1 –21.
Kodama F (1986) Japanese innovation in mechatronics technology. Science and Public Policy 13(1): 44–51.
Lai JT, Zheng D and Zhang J (2023) The effect of industrial robots ’adoption on urban income inequality in
China. Applied Economics Letters 30(17): 2388 –2395.
Lee K (2013) Schumpeterian Analysis of Economic Catch-Up . Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lei Y -W (2022) Upgrading China through automation: manufacturers, workers and the techno-developmental
state. Work, Employment & Society 36(6): 1078 –1096.
Li L (2018) China ’s manufacturing locus in 2025: with a comparison of “Made-in-China 2025” and “Industry
4.0”. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 135: 66 –74.
Li Y , Li Y , Pan A, et al. (2022) The network structure characteristics and determinants of the Belt & Road
industrial robot trade. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade 58(5): 1491.
Lin O (2018) Chinese robotic ﬁrms thrive, thanks to subsidies . Hong Kong: China. Asia Times, May 8.
Liu F-C, Simon DF, Sun Y -T, et al. (2011) China ’s innovation policies: evolution, institutional structure, and
trajectory. Research Policy 40(7): 917 –931.
Lu J, Wang T, Y uan Y , et al. (2023) Do industrial robots improve export product quality of multi-product
enterprises? Emerging Markets Finance and Trade 60: 1691 –1715. DOI: 10.1080/1540496X.2023.
2278652.
198 Competition & Change 30(1)
Mowery DC and Rosenberg N (1989) Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth . Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Naughton B (2018) The Chinese Economy: Adaptation and Growth . Massachusetts: MIT Press.
NSCAI (2021) Final report. Available at: https://www.nscai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-
Digital-1.pdf
OECD (2009) OECD Patent Statistics Manual . Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
Okimoto DJ (1989) Between MITI and the Market . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Pavitt K (1984) Sectoral patterns of technical change — towards a taxonomy and a theory. Research Policy
13(6): 343 –373.
Prodi G, Frattini F and Nicolli F (2018) The diffusion and embeddedness of innovative activities in China.
Economia Politica 35(1): 71 –106.
Prodi G, Nicolli F and Frattini F (2020) Embeddedness and local patterns of innovation: evidence from Chinese
prefectural cities. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 30(4): 1219 –1242.
Qi J and Zhang Z (2023) Robot application and adjustment of export product scope. China Finance and
Economic Review 12(1): 67 –88.
Razzaq A, An H and Delpachitra S (2021) Does technology gap increase FDI spillovers on productivity
growth? Technological Forecasting and Social Change 172: 121050.
Shanghai Municipal Commission of Commerce (2019) White paper on environment for foreign investment in
Shanghai. https://www.shanghai.gov.cn/english2019/swzt/2019-White-Paper-On-Environment-for-
Foreign-Investment-in-Shanghai.pdf
Singh JTN (2023) The advance of the state and the renewal of industrial policy in the age of strategic
competition. Third World Quarterly 44: 1. DOI: 10.1080/01436597.2023.2217766.
Storper M (1997) The Regional World . New York, NY: Guilford.
Sturgeon TJ (2021) Upgrading strategies for the digital economy. Global Strategy Journal 11(1): 34 –57.
Tang C, Huang K and Liu Q (2021) Robots and skill-biased development in employment structure: evidence
from China. Economics Letters 205: 109960.
Technavio (2019) Top 21 industrial robotics companies in 2018. Technavio. https://blog.technavio.org/blog/
top-21-companies-in-the-industrial-robotics-market
Wang L, Zhou Y and Chiao B (2023) Robots and ﬁrm innovation: evidence from Chinese manufacturing.
Journal of Business Research 162: 113878.
Wang T, Zhang Y and Liu C (2024) Robot adoption and employment adjustment: ﬁrm-level evidence from
China. China Economic Review 84: 102137.
Wen H and Zhao Z (2020) How does China ’s industrial policy affect ﬁrms’ R&D investment? Applied
Economics 53(55): 6333 –6347.
Xinhua (2017) Beijing aims high in robotics. https://www.xinhuanet.com//english/2017-08/23/c_136548842.
html
Zenglein MJ and Holzmann A (2019) Evolving Made in China 2025 . Berlin, Germany: MERICS. https://
merics.org/en/report/evolving-made-china-2025
Zhao J and Geref ﬁ G (2022) Upgrading of Chinese domestic ﬁrms in advanced manufacturing. In: Geref ﬁ G,
Bamber P and Fernandez-Stark K (eds) China’s New Development Strategies. Singapore: Springer Nature,
195–233.
Zheng Z, Liu W and Song Z (2021) Does the Belt and Road initiative promote value chain connection between
China and the Silk Road countries? Chinese Geographical Science 31(6): 979 –995.
Andreoni et al. 199