1   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: 
EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND 
SCENARIO ANAL YSIS 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL
Leonardo Garrido, Andrea M. Bassi, Georg Pallaske, Iryna Payosova, and Arya Harsono
APRIL 2023
Executive Summary
The New Economy for Brazil (NEB) is an initiative 
of WRI Brasil and the New Climate Economy 
(NCE) program. NEB identified opportunities 
in infrastructure, industrial innovation, and 
sustainable agriculture to achieve inclusive, 
robust, and resilient economic growth, as 
well as an opportunity to contribute to global 
goals on climate and the environment.
This technical note provides an in-depth 
description of tools and methods used to support 
NEB work and summarizes the efforts of a large 
group of experts and contributors, all of whom 
are acknowledged in NEB’s 2020 report, A New 
Economy for a New Age: Elements for Building a 
More Efficient and Resilient Economy for Brazil 
(Romeiro et al. 2020). It also describes channels 
for implementing the policies NEB recommends 
for improving socioeconomic outcomes in Brazil, 
including metrics relevant for policymakers, such 
as value addition, income, and employment.
The paper explores what effects achieving net zero 
targets by 2050 or 2060 will have on the economy, 
simulates different timing of the intervention, and 
compares these scenarios to reference case scenario 
which reflects continuation of the past trends. Six 
economic development scenarios for Brazil have 
been developed and simulated with the suite of 
models used by NEB. These scenarios include a 
reference case or baseline and alternative runs that 
show different degrees of ambition in transforming 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .1
1 . O verview  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
2 . A r ationale for the NEB
technical approach  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
3 . N EB suite of models
and their linkages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
4 . Summary of assumptions
and policy interventions  . . . . . . . . . .  . 11
5 . Channels of enhanced
well-being associated
with NEB policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .17
6 . Concluding Remarks .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19
Appendices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Abbreviations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .26
Endnotes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
References   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .28
Suggested Citation: Garrido, L., A.M. Bassi, 
G. Pallaske, I. Payosova, and A. Harsano. 
2023. “New Economy for Brazil: Empirical 
Framework and Scenario Analysis.” Technical 
Note. Washington, DC: World Resources 
Institute. Available online at: https://
doi.org/10.46830/writn.21.00052.
2   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
the Brazilian economy, including through the 
transformation of energy systems and the movement 
to a low carbon economy. The reference scenario 
can be interpreted as a Current Policy Scenario 
where no new low carbon, green interventions are 
identified. The New Economy for Brazil scenario 
includes many green low-carbon interventions 
which start immediately and continue until 2030, 
with no incremental interventions taken thereafter. 
Four net zero scenarios have been developed and 
modeled. Two of these scenarios model that net 
zero emissions of greenhouse gases in Brazil will 
be achieved by 2050, and two scenarios model that 
net zero emissions will be achieved by 2060. Two 
scenarios have been modeled for each of the net 
zero “deadline” to simulate the effect of timing of 
the green policy mix introduction. Two scenarios 
start with NEB interventions that continue until 
2030, followed by additional emissions-reducing 
actions taken in order to achieve net zero target by 
either 2050 or by 2060. The other two scenarios 
do not have NEB policies, with low carbon green 
interventions not immediately implemented. 
Instead, green interventions are delayed until 
2030. All four net zero scenarios are calibrated to 
COVID-19 impacts and associated recovery paths 
reported by (IMF, 2021). The analysis shows that 
significant GDP growth and jobs creation are 
observed in association with “green” sustainable 
low-carbon policy interventions. The benefits of 
interventions are observed from the first year when 
these interventions were introduced. The highest 
benefits are observed under scenarios with early 
and continuous green low-carbon interventions. 
Late action or early but interrupted interventions 
do deliver benefits as well, but more modest or 
limited Such co-benefits extend to different areas, 
including lower use in primary energy; a more 
renewable electricity generation matrix (with no 
significant impacts in electricity prices); avoided 
deforestation while meeting food and energy 
demand; higher restoration effort; the leveraging 
on green investment to foster resilience and gaining 
access both from households and producers to 
markets; and enhanced agriculture productivity. 
Additional socio-economic co-benefits are also 
identified. Overall, the outcomes of the modeled 
scenarios show that the greatest benefits from 
low-carbon green development in Brazil will be 
achieved when early and sustained green policy 
interventions and implementations are made, from 
the present day and continuing to mid-century. 
1. Overview
The New Economy for Brazil (NEB) is a joint 
initiative of WRI Brasil and the New Climate 
Economy (NCE) project.1 NEB was established 
to provide analytical inputs and engagement 
activities to advance Brazil’s policymaking 
toward a low-carbon economy. On the analytical 
side, NEB identifies several policy interventions 
capable of delivering short-term responses to 
the COVID-19 pandemic and sound medium- to 
long-term interventions for attaining inclusive 
development targets while simultaneously 
contributing to meeting climate and environmental 
goals. Along with WRI Brasil and NCE, NEB 
brings core contributions from research partners, 
including the Alberto Luiz Coimbra Institute for 
Graduate Studies and Research in Engineering 
within the Center of Technology at the Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro (COOPE/UFRJ), 
its CenergiaLab, and KnowlEdge Srl, a modeling 
consulting firm based in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Technical work under NEB identifies and 
characterizes green development policy scenarios 
along with a summary of associated co-benefits 
for the Brazilian economy. This approach allows 
for comparisons between green development 
pathways and other development paradigms 
in terms of their environmental sustainability 
and contribution to socioeconomic welfare. 
This exercise calls for explicit identification of 
transmission (implementation channels and 
impacts) of green, low-carbon policies, including 
the core feedback (impact/reaction) triggered by 
policy interventions over a set of endogenously 
determined socioeconomic outcomes. NEB 
findings are presented in WRI Brasil’s flagship 
report, A New Economy for a New Era: Elements 
for Building a More Efficient and Resilient 
Economy in Brazil (Romeiro et al. 2020).
NEB’s technical work and the identification of 
policy interventions are designed around the 
idea that, in order to develop robust policies, one 
should understand the nature of connectedness, 
interrelations, and interdependencies of climate, 
biogeochemical, and socioeconomic systems. 
Such interdependencies are also referred to as 
feedback demand and, in turn, are captured in 
complementary models unified under a common 
empirical framework. Simply put, NEB takes 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   3
inputs from integrated assessment models (IAMs), 
including biophysical representations of energy 
systems, land use, water resources, ecological 
diversity, and socioeconomic structures. IAM tools 
are often used by international research groups 
and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) to define transition scenarios for a 
low-carbon world. These modeling tools capture 
the interactions between different economic 
sectors, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and 
the consequences for the global climate (IPCC 
2022). Modeling scenarios can cover different 
scopes of assessment (sector versus whole 
country economy, region, world) and time frame 
(short term versus medium and long term). 
Short- to medium- and long-term macro and 
sector level scenarios (2021–50) were generated 
during the preparation of this technical note.
The NEB 2020 report describes results from 
modeling work conducted between mid-2019 
and early 2020 and thus, did not include impacts 
emerging from the COVID-19 pandemic (Romeiro 
et al. 2020). Further simulations performed during 
the second semester of 2020 and during January–
February 2021 included COVID-19–related model 
structures/segments. These latest results are the 
ones described in this technical note. Even with 
COVID-19 segments in the model, results described 
herein are similar to the simulations performed 
in 2019–20. Projections for 2021–50 suggest 
economic recovery from the pandemic shock, in 
the absence of other unexpected shocks. Modeling 
results for key economic indicators are presently 
supported by the observed economic dynamics.
This note is organized as follows: the subsequent 
section presents a concise rationale for the 
technical work supporting NEB. Next, the 
IAMs used by NEB, along with the method of 
connection, are summarized. Policy scenarios are 
then presented, followed by the empirical results 
for core, endogenously determined variables. 
Finally, the note identifies the channels of 
transmission (implementation and outcomes) for 
policies that can deliver more robust, inclusive 
socioeconomic outcomes while also delivering 
on climate and environmental targets.
2. A rationale for the NEB 
technical approach
NEB is built on the premise that attaining Brazil’s 
socioeconomic development goals, improved health 
care and literacy rates, and real gross domestic 
product (GDP) growth relies on public policy 
interventions and actions that deliver on ambitious 
climate and environment goals. These interventions 
include post pandemic recovery efforts as well as 
shifting toward a more resilient, inclusive medium- 
and long-term development pathway. Integrated 
modeling approaches have been used for dynamic 
modeling of climate scenarios since the early 1990s. 
The first GHG emissions scenarios were released 
by the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1990 and 1992 
and were used for climate simulations with global 
circulation models (IPCC 2000). Thanks to an 
improved understanding of the drivers of GHG 
emissions and their effect on climate change and 
the environment, these scenarios were gradually 
updated and modified. A new set of scenarios was 
released in 1996, with refined emissions baselines, 
information on trends in technological change, 
and socioeconomic development pathways across 
all countries. Scenarios were further updated by 
2000 and were used as an input for the IPCC’s 
Third Assessment Report, the Special Report on 
Emissions Scenarios (SRES) (Nakicenovic et al. 
2000). The SRES climate scenarios are comprised 
of four families in which economic growth and 
world population growth rates were the key driving 
forces for emissions. In addition, SRES scenarios 
covered such elements as technology development, 
reliance on fossil versus renewable energy sources, 
and regional and social aspects of development. 
However, the SRES scenarios did not include 
any mitigating policies. In 2005, the IPCC called 
for new emissions scenarios to be ready before 
the Fifth Assessment Report, and in 2007 the 
IPCC requested that the Steering Committee 
on New Scenarios prepare several benchmark 
concentration scenarios compatible with baseline, 
stabilization, and mitigation emission scenarios 
(van Ypersele 2010), as it was understood that 
stabilizing emissions at the baseline-year level may 
not be enough to slow climate change. From these 
processes in the IPCC and the scientific community, 
two new branches of climate change scenarios 
evolved: Representative Concentration Pathways 
4   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
(RCPs) and Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) 
(Riahi et al. 2017). RCP scenarios were meant to 
interact with climate and atmospheric projections, 
analysis of impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability, 
and IAMs for emissions and socioeconomic 
scenarios, policies, and various issues relevant 
for sustainable development. IAMs integrate 
information from diverse fields of science to analyze 
and explain the interaction of anthropogenic and 
natural systems.2 RCP scenarios developed four 
pathways for different levels of radiative forcing 
(Hausfather 2018). Although RCP scenarios are 
intended to interact with IAMs, they do not directly 
include socioeconomic “development pathway” 
narratives within the scenarios. In contrast, SSP 
scenarios promote integrated analysis of climate 
impacts, vulnerabilities, adaptation, and mitigation 
to climate change, and they elaborate on energy, 
land use, and emissions. The central question in 
all these integrated modeling approaches is how 
the climate will be changing. The NEB technical 
approach, in a way, asks a reverse question 
and instead focuses on economic development, 
with elements of mitigation and adaptation. 
Based on mounting international evidence, the 
global community has realized that the effects 
of climate change are taking a serious toll on the 
economy and society, and these negative impacts 
are intensifying. Such evidence is presented, for 
instance, in reports by New Climate Economy 
(2018) and Stern and Dietz (2008). These 
reports identify policy transmission channels 
and quantify expected benefits from green, low-
carbon interventions in renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, land, agriculture, waste, industry, 
cities, and other areas. Recent evidence challenges 
common preconceptions about costs and trade-offs 
associated with low-carbon policies (Medrilzam 
et al. 2021). These technical papers also highlight 
often-ignored benefits of green policies, such as 
mitigating negative externalities and triggering 
other positive dynamics. These policy interventions 
are becoming increasingly relevant and important as 
countries deplete natural resources and competition 
for natural capital intensifies (IPCC 2022). At 
the national level, socioeconomic benefits from 
low-carbon development policies are becoming 
increasingly apparent, as demonstrated by enhanced 
resilience and other positive outcomes from the 
rapid transition to green technologies and processes.
Nonetheless, skepticism and resistance to green 
sustainable policies persist. Several factors cause 
this resistance, including political economy issues, 
such as institutional rigidity to evolving societal 
needs and emerging technologies; inherited legal 
frameworks, slow legislative processes, and the 
networks of power; the phenomenon of “lock-in” 
on traditional technologies, paired with research 
gaps and poor uptake of low-carbon technologies 
in emerging sectors; and a lack of understanding 
of the role played by negative externalities in 
determining the socioeconomic outcomes and 
fundamental interdependencies between economies, 
climate, and the environment. At the technical level, 
skepticism is fueled by the predominant reliance 
on traditional models and empirical exercises 
that ignore, underrepresent, or misrepresent core 
relationships among climate, the environment, 
and the social economy. At times, failure to act on 
climate and environmental targets is substantiated 
by the work from leading economic thinkers (Hänsel 
et al. 2020; Nordhaus 2006, 2017a; PIK 2020).
Considering the above, NEB poses an overarching 
question: Do interventions with higher climate 
and environmental sustainability ambition have 
greater socioeconomic development potential versus 
standard business-as-usual (BAU) policies? BAU 
policies explicitly or implicitly rely on the extensive 
utilization of natural capital as a production factor. 
The question in this technical note is presented 
from the socioeconomic development standpoint. 
It focuses on the objectives that matter most to 
policymakers, including value addition, income, 
and employment generation.3 Low-carbon 
policies are not seen as end targets but rather as 
avenues to attain such desirable socioeconomic 
goals and contribute to achieving shared global 
positive outcomes. Along these lines, NEB 
modeling work strives to capture fundamental 
feedback relationships that exist in socioeconomic, 
environmental, and climate systems. It highlights 
linkages and incorporates monetary valuation of 
the market and nonmarket elements that affect 
individuals’ well-being. These linkages and elements 
are often overlooked yet are crucial for developing 
optimal policies. The following section describes 
the framework and relevant models utilized.
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   5
3. NEB suite of models and their linkages
Several features determine the choice of models 
for analyzing policy options under NEB. Brazil 
is a prominent global player. In 2020 Brazil was 
ranked 12th among countries in terms of GDP, 
and in 2021 its GDP in terms of purchasing power 
parity was US$3.44 trillion (World Bank n.d.a). 
In 2010–12 the country was the 6th-largest and 
fastest-growing economy in the world, surpassing 
the United Kingdom (Leahy and Wagstyl 2012). 
It is the world’s 7th most populous country, with 
213.99 million people (World Bank n.d.b). In the 
world, Brazil places 7th in terms of GHG emissions 
(1.4 gigatons of carbon dioxide equivalent); 5th in 
country size (8.5 million square kilometers [km2]); 
hosts 12 percent of the remaining global forests, 
an area totaling approximately 5 million km2); 
and is 24th in value of trade (over $530 billion). 
Five factors guide the choice of the model for Brazil. 
First, an economy as large and complex as Brazil’s 
cannot be represented by the small, price-taking 
economy modeling framework that is commonly 
used for developing countries. Such simple models 
cannot accurately capture a multitude of factors, 
causal links, and dynamic interrelations between 
these factors. As a result, simple models do not 
give reliable results and often cannot explain more 
complex types of interactions. Second, Brazil’s 
size, together with the openness of its economy, 
demands examination of trade channels that 
affect and are affected by a range of policies. As 
policymakers strive to preserve macroeconomic 
stability, a condition for sustained economic growth, 
careful analysis is needed in other areas as well, 
including the external, real, monetary, and fiscal 
sectors. Third, Brazil’s economy is rich in natural 
resources, with a heavy reliance on commodities for 
value addition, foreign revenue, and employment. 
Fourth, Brazil has a great potential to embark on 
an energy transition that is likely to affect both 
the structure and dynamics of economic activity 
and wealth generation in decades to come. Fifth, 
despite episodes of macroeconomic, political and 
social instability, the country had, until around 
2015 (with significant setbacks being registered 
ever since) improved its citizens’ overall average 
per capita income. However, Brazil is experiencing 
persistent inequalities, and suffers from haphazard 
urbanization, inefficient use of inputs, and waste. 
In terms of the Human Development Index (HDI), 
in 2019 Brazil dropped five positions, moving 
from 79th to 84th among 189 countries (Cristaldo 
2020; UNDP 2020). However, when using the 
novel version of the HDI, the Planetary pressures–
adjusted HDI, which incorporates environmental 
and climate change factors (including carbon 
dioxide [CO2] emissions and the number of natural 
resources), Brazil’s ranking improves (UNDP 
2000). Part of Brazil’s economic development has 
been attained at the expense of degrading and 
depleting its natural resources base, including 
water resources, forests, and biodiversity. The 
pattern of extensive exploitation of natural 
resources demands understanding the role of 
negative externalities on well-being associated 
with the misuse and overuse of such resources.  
In this way, NEB combines the following structural 
approaches under an integrated framework:
•	 A global model of computable general 
balance referred to as the Total Economy 
Assessment (TEA) model. TEA is a recursive 
dynamic computable general equilibrium (CGE) 
model that simulates the world economy’s 
functioning through the simultaneous analysis 
of the existing interactions between regions, 
sectors, and economic agents (Cunha et al. 
2020). It divides the world into 18 regions, 
Brazil being one of them, and includes a well-
detailed representation of the agricultural 
and energy sectors and international trade. 
•	 A global, bottom-up, dynamic perfect-foresight 
optimization model with extensive technological 
details of the energy and land-use systems, 
referred to as the Computable Framework 
for Energy and the Environment 
(COFFEE). It is used to evaluate global 
and regional mitigation and technological 
development strategies under different 
climate stabilization targets (Rochedo 2016). 
It divides the world into the same 18 regions 
as TEA. COFFEE was one of many IAMs that 
was used to develop one of the IPCC’s five 
illustrative mitigation pathways (IMPs).4
•	 A national, bottom-up, dynamic perfect-
foresight optimization model referred to 
as the Brazilian Land Use and Energy 
Systems (BLUES) model. It describes in 
greater detail conventional and mitigation 
6   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
technologies, investments, and operation and 
maintenance costs for the energy, land-use, 
and water-use sectors in six native regions: one 
main, overarching whole-country region and 
five geopolitical subregions nested within (de 
Carvalho Köberle 2018). The BLUES model 
is used by COPPE/UFRJ (CenergiaLab).5,6
•	 A national, customized Green Economy 
Model (GEM Brazil), which offers a 
macroeconomic assessment of the socio-
economy, the natural capital that supports it, 
and externalities (positive or negative effects 
on the parties who are neither producers nor 
consumers) (Bassi 2015). Based on Systems 
Thinking principles and System Dynamics 
methodology, it is designed to help policymakers 
identify environmentally sustainable paths 
consistent with attaining medium- and long-
term development targets, thereby enabling 
the transition to a more inclusive, robust, 
green economy. GEM Brazil allows for a better 
understanding of the co-benefits associated 
with sustainable policies, including on value of 
externalities related to different policy scenarios. 
Altogether, these models capture core characteristics 
and policy-relevant elements: country size, 
openness, macro-stability issues, the role of primary 
resources, natural capital interdependencies, and 
the effect of externalities associated with policy 
scenarios. They help analyze both short- to medium-
term impacts and responses to the COVID-19 
pandemic and medium- to long-term development 
pathways. Both macro and sectoral models are being 
used and integrated so they can partially investigate 
distributional issues such as income distribution and 
poverty, a subject that will be more comprehensively 
tackled during a subsequent phase of NEB. 
The key elements of the models and modeling 
process are described next. They refer to the 
integration mechanism across NEB models and the 
feedback that connects climate, environmental, and 
socioeconomic outcomes. They also encompass the 
unique COVID-19–related structures to describe 
the impacts of the pandemic and associated policy 
responses and the central role of externalities 
in assessing effects from policy interventions.
3.1. Integration across models
The flow of information that feeds into models 
begins with the definition of macroeconomic 
scenarios and the process of calibration to crucial 
variables, such as population and GDP growth 
rates, both at global and national levels. From the 
macroeconomic drivers, exchanging information 
and interactions between the global economic 
(TEA) and technological (COFFEE) models 
begins. A soft-link integration7 between models 
allows the TEA model to provide endogenously 
generated values for the evolution of the final 
demand for goods and services for each sector 
and region in the world. The TEA inputs directly 
interact with the endogenously generated variables 
on land, energy, and others in the world, across 
regions from the COFFEE model.8 The integration 
across models is illustrated in Figure 1. 
Once the TEA-COFFEE interaction identifies 
Brazil’s top-down boundary conditions, the bottom-
up BLUES model provides more detailed results for 
the country, ensuring consistency with the global 
trajectories. These results include the penetration 
rate of different technologies in economic 
activities, possible changes in land use and GHG 
emissions, and the evolution of the sectorial 
energy intensity, represented by the relationship 
between energy use and the activity level of the 
sectors over the analyzed horizon, all of which are 
important indicators to support decision-makers.
Outcomes from the BLUES model are used as 
inputs for calibrating the GEM Brazil model 
(Figure 1). GEM Brazil was designed to include 
all key parameters and sectors relevant to the 
future development of Brazil: population, food 
demand and supply, land use and land cover, 
economic activity, employment, access to health 
care, education, energy demand and supply, air 
emissions, water pollution, and climate trends, 
among others. The model also provides an economic 
valuation of many externalities, including GHG 
emissions. The valuation is done using approved 
standard methodologies and based on the social 
cost of carbon (Nordhaus 2017b), air pollution, 
wastewater, waste, traffic-related impacts (e.g., 
accidents, noise), the opportunity cost of water 
(from savings in the agriculture sector), and 
biodiversity. GEM Brazil takes data on energy 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   7
supply and demand, disaggregated by technologies, 
forest, land, agriculture, and socioeconomic 
indicators (including GDP) and is calibrated via an 
iterative process with the inputs from the BLUES 
model to ensure consistency of results (Figure 1). 
This calibration process is done in two steps: at 
first, the calibration process ignores—which is 
important and will be discussed below—internal 
feedbacks with the real GDP growth rate (so GDP 
results given by TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models are 
unchanged, in this first round, in GEM Brazil). A 
second step allows for complete feedback across 
core climate, environmental, and socioeconomic 
variables (including endogenous changes in GDP 
and the variables directly and indirectly affected by 
it), as explained in the following subsection. Figure 
1 summarizes the process of integration across 
models. As shown in the figure, the integration 
channels from TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models 
into GEM Brazil included the following areas: 
•	 Energy demand and emissions by the 
type of fuel, technology, and sector 
•	 Power generation, including total generation 
and power generation capacity, through the 
share of renewable generation, on average 
emissions per terajoule generated, and 
through transmission/distribution losses
•	 GHG emissions from all sources (industrial 
processes and product use, energy, land) 
An optional third step in the process is feeding 
back the endogenously generated outcomes from 
GEM Brazil into the suite of TEA-COFFEE-BLUES 
models. These new runs are once again inputted 
into GEM Brazil, seeking convergence in results. 
Usually, this is achieved after one or two iterations. 
3.2. Feedback structures under GEM Brazil
GEM Brazil is built using the system dynamics (SD) 
methodology, serving primarily as a “knowledge 
integrator.” SD is a form of computer simulation 
modeling designed to facilitate a comprehensive 
approach to development planning in the medium- 
to long-term time horizon (Forrester 2002; 
Meadows 1980; Randers 1980; Richardson and 
Pugh 1981). SD operates by simulating differential 
equations with “what if” scenarios, explicitly 
represents stocks and flows, and can integrate 
optimization and econometrics. The purpose of SD 
is not to make precise predictions of the future9 or 
to optimize performance; instead, these models 
are used to inform policy formulation, compute 
policy outcomes (both desirable and undesirable), 
and assist in creating a resilient and well-balanced 
strategy (Probst and Bassi 2014; Roberts et 
al. 1983). Such an approach is consistent with 
policymakers’ thinking framework, which weighs 
sets of outcomes based on political, technical, and 
institutional preferences in choosing from among 
policy packages (Garrido and Bassi 2022).
Notes: BLUES = Brazilian Land Use and Energy Systems; COFFEE = Computable Framework for Energy and the Environment; IPPU = 
industrial processes and product use; TEA = T otal Economy Assessment .
Source: Authors
Figure 1 
Integration across models under NEB

8   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
GEM Brazil includes four key capitals (physical, 
human, social, and natural) interconnected via the 
explicit representation of feedback loops (reinforcing 
or balancing).10 Policies can be implemented 
to strengthen growth by supporting loops. For 
instance, they could include investments in physical 
capital, which, other things being equal, increases 
aggregate demand and potential growth. Others 
could curb change (e.g., by strengthening balancing 
loops). Under NEB, GEM Brazil was used to test the 
effectiveness of individual policies and investments 
(by assessing their impact within and across sectors 
and for social, economic, and environmental 
indicators) and inform development planning (by 
determining the outcomes of the simultaneous 
implementation of various intervention options). 
Sectors are integrated within GEM Brazil and 
across models (TEA-COFFEE-BLUES) using 
stocks and flows (another central feature in 
SD modeling), which brings consistency to the 
mathematical formulations used to create the 
model.11 This integration was possible through 
collaborative work among modeling partners, as 
described in the previous section. The resulting 
consistency within and across models provide 
a comprehensive, integrated view of many 
variables of interest for policymakers.12
GEM Brazil represents many feedback relationships. 
Two of them are noticeably absent from mainstream 
structural models and are highlighted in this 
technical note. These two feedback relationships are 
central for explaining the connectedness of climate, 
environmental, and socioeconomic outcomes and 
are paramount for the design of robust development 
policies. The first feedback relationship captures the 
impacts known as total factor productivity (TFP) in 
mainstream models. The second feedback captures 
the relationship structure in the main loop that 
governs linkages between climate, the environment 
(including policies), and the social economy.13
Channels affecting total factor 
productivity (TFP)
Traditional approaches, including neoclassical 
models, incorporate TFP as a proximate source of 
GDP growth. Generally, TFP is introduced in models 
either as an exogenous input or as a composite 
factor that combines an exogenous parameter or 
trend and an endogenous element that responds 
to changes in other variables, such as the rate 
of accumulation of human capital or physical 
infrastructure. GEM Brazil broadens the spectrum 
of factors affecting GDP and includes changes 
in the availability of environmental goods and 
services. Depletion or degradation of natural capital 
reduces its availability, whereas intentional or 
natural renewal and accumulation of natural capital 
increases its availability. A TFP-comparable variable 
is included in GEM Brazil and affects GDP. This TFP 
variable is a function of other groups of variables: 
human capital, health, education, and infrastructure 
of public services; air and water quality (measured 
through emissions); elements associated with 
haphazard industrialization and urbanization 
(waste, traffic congestion); and the quantity and 
quality of the natural capital (e.g., forest resources, 
water, biodiversity). The social cost of carbon is 
also included/reflected in the TFP function:
 
(EQUATION 1)
where TFP, TECH, HEAL, EDUC, EMIS, ENER, 
WAST and INFR are indexes that proxy for factor 
productivity, technological progress, health 
status, education, GHG emissions, level of energy 
consumption, and wastewater production.14 
The i subscript refers to sectors of economic 
activity (primary, industry, and services), 
and t refers to time. Such characterization 
provides the basis for understanding the 
differential impacts of green versus nongreen 
policies over socioeconomic outcomes. 
The balancing feedback for climate, the 
environment, and the social economy
GEM Brazil models a fundamental feedback 
relationship: any policy that aims to boost 
aggregate final demand and output (such as the 
one from a fiscal stimulus for consumption or 
capital formation) creates a balancing effect (or 
“balancing loop”) that counters the growth in the 
demand and output. This happens because such 
“stimulating” policy induces higher demand for 
inputs (e.g., for energy, environmental goods, and 
services) and, all else equal, contributes to higher 
GHG emissions, depletes or degrades natural 
capital, and negatively affects TFP. The strength of 
this balancing effect depends on the initial state, 
strength of the impacts (including the type of 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   9
policy: green versus nongreen), and how binding 
these inputs are in the production process. By 
extension, the balancing effect’s power is attenuated 
whenever the initial boost in demand is composed 
of low-carbon, environmentally sustainable 
policies or is supported by them. Appendix A 
provides a high-level representation for a CLD 
representing this core feedback, balancing loop. 
3.3. COVID-19–related structures
Recent literature on the economic impacts of 
the COVID-19 pandemic highlights three main 
channels of shock delivery (Fiddamann, T. 2020). 
The first channel delivers shocks to the economy 
through medical and health emergencies (Kaye 
et al. 2021). The second channel delivers policy-
induced supply shocks and impacts of public 
and private containment measures, which, in 
turn, have triggered a demand effect (Guan et 
al. 2020; Helper and Soltas 2021). The third 
channel of shock is through policy responses 
aiming to refloat economies and bring them 
back onto the path of sustained economic 
growth (Kirti et al. 2022; OECD 2020, 2022).
GEM Brazil does not incorporate specific structures 
to model COVID-19’s dynamics,15 and it does 
not include estimates of the number of infected, 
deaths, or the pattern of the epidemic (number of 
waves, their amplitude, and height) in response 
to virus-intrinsic factors (e.g., the R0 factor) or 
social and policy responses. However, GEM Brazil 
incorporates four different substructures to capture 
the policy-induced shocks and the alternative types 
of responses. A key difference of COVID-19 from 
previous economic crises (e.g., the 2008–9 global 
financial and economic crisis) is that in the case of 
COVID-19, both consumption and production have 
been impacted. These impacts are incorporated 
in the GEM Brazil model through the following: 
•	 A shock to economic activity from reduced 
production (a supply-induced shock that affects 
demand and limits labor force availability). 
In GEM Brazil, this is represented by 
including a constraint to labor availability, 
which directly impacts production.
•	 A shock to economic activity from reduced 
consumption and investments (e.g., due 
to social distancing, avoided travel). This 
is represented in the model by including a 
temporary constraint to consumption (of the 
same strength as the constraint to employment) 
and investment, resulting in a higher propensity 
to save that does not translate into investment.
•	 A shock to capital utilization from the increased 
cost of doing business and reduced access to 
markets. This is represented in the model as 
reduced capital stock due to business closures. 
•	 Additional shocks to specific sectors, 
negatively impacting transport demand 
and energy consumption when 
business activity is constrained.
These four model substructures are included 
in GEM Brazil, which is then calibrated using 
data from TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models to 
retrieve key model parameters introduced in 
them. Appendix B provides further details on 
how these four substructures are constructed.
Those structures can be utilized to capture 
candidate policy interventions (see “Summary 
of assumptions and policy interventions”).
3.4. Externalities
GEM Brazil includes structural representations of 
different natural capital components, capturing 
the provision of environmental goods and services 
to the economy. Both quantity and quality factors 
are included. This enables the model to estimate 
(generally unintended) consequences of policies 
and investments that are meant to fuel economic 
activity. These consequences refer to air and water 
pollution, the generation of solid wastes, transport-
related costs (e.g., accidents, congestion), and 
biodiversity losses (and corresponding ecosystem 
service losses). The social cost of carbon (SCC)16 is 
also estimated. Table 1 summarizes the externalities 
computed by GEM Brazil, their definition (how 
they are calculated), and the costs per unit of 
the different externalities (Nordhaus 2017b), as 
identified in the relevant literature and generally 
accepted as the current global standard.17
10   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
What is critical regarding these negative 
externalities is that although they do not have 
a market-defined value, they impose a cost to 
society that may not be immediately manifested 
in monetary terms. Instead, the externalities take 
the form of direct loss of individuals’ well-being, 
including increases in the rates of mortality, 
morbidity, and other parameters that measure 
changes in quality of life or amount of life. From 
there, externalities manifest in economic activity, 
such as through reduced quantity and quality of 
human capital and through inefficiencies in the 
production process. These parameters, in turn, 
increase intermediate costs and reduce potential and 
effective output. Furthermore, the monetary costs 
of mitigating the impacts of negative externalities 
often affect GDP (e.g., costs of hospitalization, 
waste management, public services to ease or solve 
traffic problems). Under these circumstances, what 
happens is that this “value addition” is not incurred 
to enhance individuals’ welfare but to offset (to a 
certain degree) the loss of welfare that occurs as 
a result of the externality. Therefore, such value 
addition reduces available resources (consumption 
and investment), and, instead of leading to a net 
increase in individuals’ well-being, the resources 
often are used to support the status quo.18
EXTERNALITY COMPUTED AS (DEFINITION) COSTS PER UNIT OF EXTERNALITY
Air pollution (excluding 
from transport)
Sum of costs from nitrous oxide 
(NOX), particulate matter (PM 2 .5), 
and sulfur dioxide (SO 2) emissions
PM2 .5 = US$120,000/tonne a
SO2 = US$31,000/tonne b
NOX = US$4,600/tonne c
Solid waste (open 
dumping and 
managed landfills)
The environmental cost of open 
dumping (cost of greenhouse 
gas emissions) plus the total 
cost of managed landfills 
(sanitary and others)
Open dumping, social cost of carbon = US$31/tonne d
Cost of managed waste = US$63 . 1/tonne of managed waste e
Traffic/transport-related
Sum of cost of air pollution; plus the 
cost of noise; plus the cost of urban 
effects; plus the cost of accidents
Cost of air pollution = €0  .0052/vehicle/km f
Cost of noise = €0  .0019/vehicle/km g
Cost of accidents = €0  .029/vehicle/km h
Cost of urban effects = €0  .0008/vehicle/km i
Water opportunity cost
Foregone value added from 
use in thermal generation in 
industry and agriculture
Value added per acre-foot used for agriculture 
production = US$60  .49/acre-foot j
Value added per acre-foot used for industrial 
processing = US$228 .02/acre-foot k
Value added per acre-foot used for thermal 
generation = US$27  .26/acre-foot l
Biodiversity loss 
(change in the 
value of ecosystem 
services provided)
Net change in value of 
biodiversity from the following:
• agriculture to waste
• forest to agriculture
• forest to settlement
• waste to forest
• waste to settlement
Value of biodiversity, agricultural land = US$1,115/ha
Value of biodiversity, fallow land = US$45,058/ha
Value of biodiversity, forest land = US$50,110/ha
Value of biodiversity, urban land = US$352/ha
Table 1 
Economic Valuation of Externalities
Note: Averages are calculated using open-source databases for Brazil and recognized industry methodologies . Health costs per unit valued 
at US$2010 and €2008 prices .
Sources: compiled by Bassi A. and Garrido L.
a–c . EPA 2013 
d . Nordhaus 2017b
e . EconStor 2004 (Dijkgraaf and Vollebergh 2003)
f–i . (CE Delft 2011)
j–l . Frederick et al . 1996 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   11
3.5. Some caveats regarding 
the modeling framework
Three caveats are worth considering for better 
understanding outcomes from the modeling 
work and their ability to answer questions 
regarding the time benefits of NEB policies 
and their distribution across actors.
First, the empirical exercise combines optimization, 
equilibrium frameworks (CGE, land and energy 
models: TEA, COFFEE, and BLUES) with a 
“what if” approach that allows for disequilibrium 
conditions (GEM Brazil). Results from optimization 
correspond to optimal endogenous outcomes as 
related to a given “objective function” (such as 
the lowest cost of the energy technology mix or 
the maximum utility for a representative agent). 
Results from the equilibrium frameworks, in 
turn, are a realization set for a larger number of 
variables (including variables for natural capital, 
externalities) that is consistent with results from 
optimization. This framework may or may not be 
aligned to a given policymaker’s preferences. In 
other words, it is open for discussion whether the 
choice of policies is consistent with (subjective) 
weights stakeholders and policymakers assign 
to associated development outcomes.  
Second, TEA-COFFEE models run with 10-year 
time steps, and the BLUES model runs on 5-year 
time steps, which makes it difficult to appraise 
short-term dynamics and transitions to low-
carbon systems, especially during the critical 
2020–30 period. GEM Brazil, in turn, is run with 
monthly time steps (to capture several climate-
related seasonal patterns) and yields results on 
an annual basis. However, because it uses inputs 
from TEA-COFFEE-BLUES, there are some 
limitations to appraise short-term dynamics, 
including impacts and responses to COVID-19.
Third, it is worth noting that the empirical exercise 
does not include a comprehensive, economy-wide 
cost-benefit analysis. Such analyses could provide 
a foundation to assess how the costs of NEB 
interventions compare to the variables policymakers 
care about, such as value addition and income and 
employment generation. The exercise is limited 
to identifying the lowest cost for a given energy 
mix but falls short of providing a fuller appraisal 
of fiscal implications and of financing needs.
4. Summary of assumptions 
and policy interventions  
Six scenarios have been created with the suite of 
models used by NEB, including a reference case, or 
baseline, and alternative runs that show different 
degrees of ambition in transforming the Brazilian 
economy, including through the transformation of 
energy systems and the transition to a low-carbon 
economy. They are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 
Definition of modeled scenarios: NEB and net zero
Source: Authors .
CLIMATE AMBITION SCENARIO
Reference Ref
New Economy for Brazil NEB
Net zero in 2050 NetZero
New economy for Brazil 
and net zero in 2050 NEB_NZ
Net zero in 2060 NetZero_60
New economy for Brazil 
and net zero in 2060 NEB_NZ_60
NEB SCENARIOS NET ZERO SCENARIOS
• Increased share of 
sales for the following:
• Hybrid flex-fuel 
vehicles
• Electric buses
• Fuel cell (light, 
medium, and 
heavy trucks)
• Increased share of 
biojet kerosene
• Energy efficiency for 
building sector
• Concentrated solar power 
and photovolatic reservoir
• Charcoal use in iron 
and steel sector
• High productivity 
agriculture and pasture
• Linear decreasing 
trajectory to net 
zero emissions in 
2050 or 2060
12   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
Reference case. It reflects a continuation of 
past trends. It can be interpreted as a Current 
Policy Scenario (2020) where no new low-carbon, 
green interventions are identified. Historical 
trends are maintained over the horizon. 
NEB scenario. This includes many interventions 
spanning areas of technology adoption of low-
carbon solutions, including in the transportation 
sector, commercial and residential buildings, the 
power generation sector, the introduction of new 
material on the productive process, and actions 
that enhance productivity in the agricultural sector. 
The NEB scenario also includes other selected 
interventions that affect energy consumption, 
electricity generation, industrial processes, and 
product use that affect land dynamics. Table 2 
summarizes all such interventions, and Appendix 
C identifies quantitative targets by five-year 
periods. Critically, the NEB scenario stops the 
increase in policy ambition by the year 2030. 
Thus, policy targets post-2030 for NEB remain 
at the 2030 level, as detailed in Appendix C. 
The NEB scenario is comparable to the “NEB+” 
discussed in the NEB 2020 report (Romeiro V. 
et al., 2020), but it has been revised to account 
for the impacts of COVID-19 and the effect of 
associated responses. For this purpose, World 
Economic Outlook data from the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) was utilized (IMF 2021). 
Net zero scenarios. Four net zero scenarios 
are produced, all of which are also calibrated to 
COVID-19 impacts and associated recovery paths 
reported by IMF (2021). The COVID impact 
is the same across all scenarios, including the 
short-term negative impact and the recovery 
path. Two of them include policy ambitions that 
are consistent with Brazil moving to net zero 
CO2 emissions by 2050, and the other two are 
compatible with reaching such targets by 2060:
•	 NEB_NZ adopts the same policy mix as NEB 
by 2030 and continues increasing mitigation 
ambition, so the net zero CO2 emissions target 
is reached by 2050. This is the most ambitious 
low-carbon scenario produced under NEB.
•	 NetZero also attains the net zero CO2 
emissions target by 2050 but delays the 
launch of low-carbon policies until 2030.
•	 NEB_NZ_60 adopts the same policy mix as 
NEB (and NEB_NZ) by 2030 and continues 
increasing mitigation ambition so that the 
net zero CO2 emissions target is reached by 
2060. NEB_NZ_60 has higher ambition than 
NetZero by 2030, but after that, the pace 
of progress slows compared to NetZero. 
•	 NetZero_60 attains the net zero target by 2060 
but delays the launch of low-carbon policies until 
2030. It is less ambitious than NEB_NZ_60. 
4.1. Summary of Results from 
NEB Modeling work
Net zero CO2 emissions in 2050 and 2060 
are not the same level as 2005.  To reach net 
zero, all CO2 emitted must be compensated 
by CO2 removals, so the sum is zero.
The NEB 2020 report (Romeiro V. et al. 2020) 
summarized the positive outcomes associated 
with NEB scenarios. Net zero scenarios with 
higher climate and green ambition were shown 
to also have more considerable co-benefits. 
From the use of TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models, 
such co-benefits extend to different areas: 
•	 Lower use in primary energy 
•	 A more renewable electricity generation matrix 
(with no significant impacts in electricity prices) 
•	 Avoided deforestation while meeting 
food and energy demands
•	 Higher restoration effort
•	 Leveraging green investment to foster 
resilience and gaining access both from 
households and producers to markets 
•	 Enhanced agriculture productivity 
The use of GEM Brazil also identified additional 
socioeconomic co-benefits. They manifest through 
lower primary energy use (further explained in 
“Channels of enhanced well-being associated with 
NEB policies”) to determine enhanced outcomes 
relative to those indicated in Romeiro et al. (2020).
To start, NEB scenarios expand diverse renewable 
energy sources capable of meeting the country’s 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   13
growing energy demand while shifting toward 
the decarbonizing path. These scenarios expand 
solar, both photovoltaic and concentrated solar 
power; increase energy generation from biomass 
and sugarcane; replace fossil fuels with biomass-
based fuels, such as diesel and kerosene biomass-
to-liquid (BTL) fuels for transportation and 
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), 
associated with ethanol and biomass-based fuels 
production. Figure 2 summarizes outcomes 
from the BLUES model on the distribution of 
primary energy, shares in electricity generation, 
biofuels, and transport energy consumption.
As Figure 2 illustrates, primary energy demand 
will increase over the next 30 years, in all modeled 
scenarios. Reliance on oil as a primary energy 
source will reduce in all scenarios by 2030, and 
even more so by 2050. The share of sugarcane 
as a primary energy source will also decline in 
all scenarios, most prominently in the NEB_NZ 
scenario. Instead, the share of natural gas as 
a primary energy source will increase and will 
largely compensate for the reduction in oil use in 
four scenarios out of six that were modeled: in the 
reference scenario, NEB, NetZero, and NetZero_60. 
All models show that the biomass will become 
the most important primary energy source in 
Brazil during the following decades. The strongest 
(approximately quadruple) increase of biomass as 
a primary energy source over the 30-year period 
is observed in the NEB_NZ scenario, followed by 
slightly more modest growth of biomass in the 
NEB_NZ_60 scenario. Hydropower capacity as a 
primary energy source is not anticipated to increase. 
It remains largely unchanged in all scenarios, 
both in the next 10 years and by 2050. Nuclear 
energy as a primary energy source will marginally 
increase, and coal will marginally lose its role. Three 
scenarios out of six project that solar will strengthen 
its position as a primary energy source, yet its 
share in the total primary energy demand remains 
very low, only slightly higher than that of wind. 
The main share of electricity is generated by 
hydropower plants, and all scenarios show an 
increase in electricity generation, both in absolute 
terms and in the volumes of hydrogeneration. 
The generation volume is increasing more 
than hydropower generation. An additional 
amount of electricity generation, according 
to the model and scenarios, will come from 
bagasse (sugarcane) and solar, and the share 
of electricity generated from natural gas will 
steeply decline between 2030 and 2050. The 
NEB, NEB_NZ, and NEB_NZ_60 scenarios 
all forecast a substantial increase in electricity 
generation from concentrated solar power.   
For biofuels, three scenarios out of six (NetZero, 
NEB_NZ, and NEB_NZ_60) predict that first-
generation ethanol will be phased out by 2050 
and will be partially replaced by the ethanol 
from BECCS. These three scenarios also predict 
that a substantial share of biofuels in Brazil will 
be composed of advanced biodiesel BTL carbon 
capture and storage by 2050. The volumes of 
advanced biokerosene BTL will nearly double 
in all scenarios between 2030 and 2050. 
Overall, the NetZero and NetZero_60 scenarios 
show the same level of transport energy 
consumption in 2050 as the reference scenario. 
The greatest reduction is predicted by the NEB_NZ 
and NEB_NZ_60 scenarios. These scenarios also 
show the lowest use of anhydrous ethanol among 
the six scenarios. Transport energy consumption 
will be mainly met by diesel. NetZero and 
NetZero_60 scenarios show greater reliance on 
diesel in 2050 than other scenarios evaluated in 
the model. Gasoline and kerosene, with about 
equal shares in transport energy consumption, 
are the second most important after diesel.
Figure 3, in turn, summarizes the results of NEB 
scenarios on the land and agriculture sectors. NEB 
policies include extensive land-use changes due to 
higher productivity of pasture and agricultural areas. 
Under the NEB_NZ scenario, about 40 million 
hectares (ha) of pasture are recovered, compared to 
about 15 million ha proposed on Brazil’s nationally 
determined contribution (NDC). NEB also includes 
a 2 million ha reduction in deforestation as one of 
the cheapest ways to decarbonize the economy.
NEB policies help rapidly decrease CO2 emissions: 
in 2030, projected emissions under this scenario 
are about 40 percent lower than in the reference 
scenario. Although all NEB scenarios comply 
with the revised NDC’s intermediate target (a 43 
percent GHG reduction in 2030, relative to 2005 
levels), only the most ambitious ones (NEB_NZ 
and NEB_NZ_60) would align with the Paris 
Agreement. To ensure that temperature increase 
14   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
Figure 2 
BLUES model results for the energy and transport sectors
Notes: Mtep = Million-T on Equivalent of Petroleum; TWh = T erawatt-hour; CCS = carbon capture and storage; CHP = combined heat and 
power generation; CSP = concentrated solar power; DG = distributed generation; IC = imported coal; NC = nationally-sourced coal; PV = 
photovoltaic .
a. Primary energy
b. Electricity generation
c. Biofuels
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Ref
Ref
NEB
NetZero
NetZero_60
NEB_NZ
NEB_NZ_60
Ref
NEB
NetZero
NetZero_60
NEB_NZ
NEB_NZ_602020 2030 2050
Mtep
Oil Natural Gas Coal Biomass Sugarcane Hydro Solar Wind Nuclear
0
200
400
600
800
2020 2030 2050
TWh
Ref
Ref
NEB
NetZero
NetZero_60
NEB_NZ
NEB_NZ_60
Ref
NEB
NetZero
NetZero_60
NEB_NZ
NEB_NZ_60
Hydro Imp. coal DG CSP PV CHPGas Oil Bio Bagasse Nuclear Wind
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
Ref
Ref
NEB
NetZero
NetZero_60
NEB_NZ
NEB_NZ_60
Ref
NEB
NetZero
NetZero_60
NEB_NZ
NEB_NZ_602020 2030 2050
PJ
Ethanol_1stGen AdvBioDiesel_BTL_CCS
AdvBioDiesel_BTL ATJ
AdvBioKerosene_Bio_BTL Biodiesel Ethanol_BioCCS
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   15
Figure 2 
BLUES model results for the energy and transport sectors (Cont'd)
Figure 3 
BLUES model results for the land and agriculture sectors
Source: Authors, via TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models .
a. Cumulative land-use change between 2011 and 2030
d. Transport energy consumption in 2050
b. High productivity technologies
Source: Authors, via TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models .
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Ref NEB NetZero NetZero_60 NEB_NZ NEB_NZ_60
PJ
Electricity Gasoline Biodiesel KeroseneBunker Ethanol_Anhydrous Hydrogen Diesel Ethanol_Hydrated
16   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
does not exceed the 1.5°C–2°C limit, both carbon 
reduction and carbon removal technologies 
are extremely important, as are the recovery of 
significantly degraded pastures and BECCS. This 
is reflected in Figure 4 (panel a). When complying 
only with the intermediate targets and not taking 
further action, as in the NEB scenario, emissions 
can increase after 2030, returning to reference 
case levels. However, with more ambitious actions, 
Brazil could comply with net zero targets. 
Real GDP growth accelerates with increased 
ambition in the net zero scenarios, especially 
in the last analyzed decade (2040–50), 
following a long-term recovery from the 
COVID-19 pandemic and a full push from 
NEB policies to meet the climate targets. 
Figure 5 shows how different scenarios will be 
realized in real per capita income (GDP). The 
NEB_NZ scenario has the highest growth rate in 
total GDP, and in 2050 it yields per capita income 
that is over 15 percent higher than that computed 
for the reference case: R$24,981 versus R$21,627, 
in constant prices. In the GEM model, the base 
year is 2000, but the results for income are smaller. 
Additionally, calculations were made with 2005 
and 2010 as a base year. All other scenarios show 
less ambitious results, yet all intervention scenarios 
(NEB, NetZero_60, NEB_NZ, NEB_NZ_60) show 
higher real per capita GDP than the reference case 
scenario. General improvements in the economy 
are accompanied by reduced impacts from 
negative externalities (summarized in Table 1). 
GEM Brazil estimates an average reduction in the 
Figure 4 
CO2 emissions and real GDP growth 
Figure 5 
Real per capita income and average value of externalities
Source: Authors, via TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models .
Source: Authors, via TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models .
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   17
costs associated with negative externalities. Here, 
the reduction in the cost of negative externalities 
could be viewed as avoided costs or avoided 
losses to national economy and are expressed as 
a share of GDP. The NEB_NZ scenario shows the 
highest reduction: in 2021–50, the cost of negative 
externalities to Brazil’s economy is reduced to the 
equivalent of 3.5 percent of GDP. Under the NEB_
NZ_60 scenario, the cost of negative externalities 
is reduced by 2.9 percent of GDP. Under the NEB 
scenario, the cost of negative externalities is reduced 
in the amount of 1.8 percent of GDP (Figure 5).
5. Channels of enhanced well-being 
associated with NEB policies
Results from the “Summary of assumptions and 
policy interventions” section indicate general 
improvements in socioeconomic outcomes from 
low-carbon policies relative to the reference 
case. No intertemporal trade-offs are seen on 
aggregate, meaning that Brazil does not need 
to wait to benefit from those policies. Although 
losers are naturally expected in the transition—
mainly those dependent on or linked to high 
carbon sectors—the overall NEB picture shows 
cumulative immediate and sustained gains for 
most of the population and for the economy. This 
underlined statement will be explained below.  
Traditionally, potential gains from low-carbon 
policies have been ignored or underestimated. 
As explained above, many economic models fail 
to incorporate core linkages among climate, the 
environment, and the social economy. In other 
circumstances, such a connection is not sufficiently 
captured and established. There were attempts 
to quantify the contribution of some natural 
capital inputs (e.g., land, water), yet issues such 
as the quality of those resources (pollution) were 
commonly ignored. The role of externalities is rarely 
considered. Therefore, under many circumstances, 
low-carbon policies show minimal differential 
impacts on well-being (as proxied, for instance, by 
income, value addition, employment, and poverty 
changes) relative to standard policy packages.19 
First, this section addresses some caveats 
regarding the benefits of development policies 
characterized by their low-carbon, environmental 
sustainability profile. Next, it summarizes the 
sources of improved well-being in low-carbon 
scenarios relative to a reference case and aligns 
with findings of alternative models and empirical 
exercises. The sources of improved well-being 
can be divided into three main channels: through 
TFP, through the availability of natural capital and 
associated primary resources, and via externalities.
5.1. Qualifying co-benefits associated 
with low-carbon policymaking 
identified under NEB
The real gains from low-carbon development 
policies have been empirically observed around 
the world and are within reach for Brazil, should 
the country embark on a transition to low-carbon 
systems like the one described by NEB. However, 
potential benefits from the NEB policies need 
to be adequately qualified, as indicated next. 
The NEB scenarios: Not a 
forecasting exercise 
The policy scenarios generated from TEA-COFFEE-
BLUES-GEM models should not be interpreted as 
a “forecasting” exercise. For instance, when a 3.1 
percent average real GDP growth rate is reported 
for 2021–50 under a NEB_NZ scenario, this does 
not mean that NEB is predicting such a result 
over the period. It means that under the NEB 
integrated framework (both from the optimization 
TEA-COFFEE-BLUES side and the “what if” 
GEM Brazil framework), the associated policies 
are consistent, and result is the attainment of 
output growth and other endogenous outcomes. 
Focus on strengthening the loops between 
socioeconomic and climate-environmental 
structures in the appraisal of co-benefits 
TEA-COFFEE-BLUES models provide a complete 
picture of the demand and supply elements to 
determine the optimal level and changes in the 
allocation of resources in response to policy. It 
is understood that demand-side factors play a 
fundamental role in the resulting socioeconomic 
outcomes. In the case of Brazil, changes in the 
allocation of resources are affected by labor 
market rigidity, by financial sector constraints 
(including savings availability and financial 
intermediation problems), by the lack of fiscal space, 
and so forth. However, the analysis of potential 
18   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
socioeconomic benefits under GEM Brazil is 
restricted to elements that affect potential output 
and the derived implications over variables such as 
income, employment, fiscal outcomes, and so on. 
Therefore, NEB focuses on strengthening the loops 
between socioeconomic structures and climate-
environmental structures. From this perspective, 
increases in GDP in the NEB scenarios relative to 
the reference case, should be interpreted as the 
potential realization of such gains in value addition 
on the condition that no binding constraints (for 
instance, from the demand side) are in place. In this 
research, proxy indicators are used for measuring 
externalities linked to the availability and quality of 
environmental goods and services that contribute 
to and are affected by anthropogenic activity.
About inclusiveness and robustness 
of growth under NEB scenarios
NEB brings together several global and national-, 
macro-, and sector-level tools and associated 
policies through TEA-COFFEE-BLUES-GEM 
Brazil models (Bassi, A., and G. Pallaske, 2020). 
Describing outcomes from the NEB 2020 report 
highlights the role of the NEB policies to help build 
resilience in Brazil’s socioeconomic systems, helping 
chart a more inclusive, welfare-improving growth 
path (Romeiro et al. 2020). Some of the channels 
include advancing quality infrastructure, adopting 
sustainable technologies, and transitioning to 
more sustainable and resilient agriculture. With all 
these in mind, it is also acknowledged that a more 
comprehensive, empirically grounded analysis 
would require incorporating additional tools into 
NEB. For instance, the tools from micro-level 
analyses, spatial assessments, and several case 
studies could shed more light on distributional, 
sectoral, and regional impacts of policies for a 
just transition toward low-carbon systems. 
5.2. Channels of transmission 
This last discussion builds on the identification 
of distinct NEB model structures (see “NEB suite 
of models and their linkages”), which enables a 
better understanding of the climate-environment- 
socioeconomic development nexus and describes 
channels of transmission for NEB policies that 
determine enhanced socioeconomic outcomes. 
Total factor productivity (TFP)
Equation 1 in the “Feedback structures under 
GEM Brazil” section describes the set of variables 
that directly affect the productivity of economic 
activity sectors—and, consequently, the GDP—and 
associated socioeconomic variables. Changes in TFP 
are driven by GHG emissions, proxies for human 
capital (health, education), technology, energy costs, 
and wastewater. As explained above, ecological 
scarcity and the associated value of biodiversity 
losses are also conceptually and empirically 
identified as drivers of TFP. However, under 
the current GEM Brazil version, this link is not 
incorporated. The connection of biodiversity to land 
sector variables is high level. It is not sufficiently 
disaggregated to account for heterogeneity elements 
and other factors that properly capture ecological 
scarcity and the value of biodiversity in Brazil. 
Appendix D further identifies variables and other 
model parameters that affect the explanatory 
elements (proxies) included in Equation 1.
Such specification for TFP highlights the 
role of NEB policies relative to alternative 
interventions (Romeiro et al. 2020). Specific TFP-
enhancing effects occur from the following:
•	 Technological progress in sectors 
(industry, services) associated with 
innovative low-carbon solutions
•	 Reduction of intermediate energy 
consumption relative to gross output 
under energy efficiency measures
•	 Improvements in human capital associated with 
enhanced air quality and, in general, lower SCC
•	 Improved wastewater treatment, which also 
contributes to human capital and increases 
water availability for the agricultural sector
•	 Enhanced availability and resilience of 
infrastructure services, providing more extensive 
and reliable access to a more significant 
fraction of producers and households
NEB policies are associated with differential 
improvements in all topics above, thus helping 
to attain enhanced socioeconomic outcomes.
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   19
Availability of natural capital and 
associated primary resources
In Appendix A, Figure A-1 highlights the role of 
natural capital for value addition, especially in 
primary resource-dependent economies. NEB 
policies to enhance agricultural productivity, 
improve water quality and availability, expand 
infrastructure service and energy access, and 
reforest or restore degraded land enable greater 
availability of environmental goods and services, all 
of which directly (and indirectly) contribute to the 
output. Appendix E summarizes the transmission 
mechanism of those NEB policies to agriculture 
production (both in conventional and sustainable 
activities) and value added per unit of production. 
NEB policies tackle a primary concern in Brazil. 
They reconcile the need to increase output in 
primary activities to meet the growing national 
(and global) demand while preserving national 
forests and the biodiversity base. Sustainable 
agricultural practices that can be applied to 
existing crops include fertilizers, sustainable 
roads and transportation, tackling preharvest 
losses, wastewater treatment, other interventions 
of research and development, and human and 
physical capital. All of these would enable additional 
yield. Innovative business approaches can directly 
benefit from the vast, rich biodiversity base. These 
practices have the potential to boost primary 
sector-related inputs while maintaining the primary 
forest and continuously recovering degraded land.
Externalities 
The “NEB suite of models and their linkages” 
section summarized externalities and their valuation 
method under GEM Brazil. Mitigating such 
externalities through the NEB scenarios contributes 
to enhanced socioeconomic outcomes, as described 
above. Wastewater output is reduced or treated, air 
quality is improved, and both outcomes positively 
affect human capital. In several cases, mitigation 
of externalities is not directly connected to GDP 
outcomes. Among those externalities are pressure 
on biodiversity and traffic-related externalities 
other than emissions. However, addressing these 
externalities still has an unambiguously positive 
effect on well-being. Table 1 gathered, from the 
empirical literature, the per-unit costs of negative 
externalities. Total estimated values of mitigating 
such negative externalities can be combined 
with standard metrics of well-being to discern 
the economy-wide benefits of NEB. An ongoing 
challenge under standard national accounting is 
precisely understanding how to bring together 
typical proxies for well-being, such as income and 
GDP per capita, with other nonmarket elements 
that are equally relevant for welfare analysis.
6. Concluding Remarks
The NEB 2020 report (WRI Brasil 2020) 
summarized the positive outcomes associated 
with NEB scenarios. Under NetZero scenario GDP 
per capita is more than 15 percent higher than in 
the reference scenario. Economic performance in 
low-carbon scenarios with green investments is 
improved through higher total factor productivity. 
The economic modeling carried out to evaluate 
the benefits was initiated before the COVID-19 
pandemic, and the modeling results still stand when 
including the impact of the pandemic. These new 
economic pathways offer Brazil a stronger and better 
economic recovery trajectory and employment 
boost compared to a BAU recovery. The impact of 
COVID-19 within modeled scenarios is smoothed by 
the model’s use of data values averaged over five-
year intervals. Furthermore, although COVID-19 
did cause a slowdown in Brazil’s economy, the 
effect was short term, and the economy promptly 
started to recover. The negative impacts of the 
pandemic are expected to fully abate by 2030, with 
greater recovery predicted by 2050. The projected 
recovery numbers observed in the modeling 
scenarios so far have been supported by actual 
data. The analysis presented herein showed 
that sustainable, low-carbon practices 
can lead to significant GDP growth, with 
a total accumulated gain of R$2.8 trillion 
by 2030 compared to BAU and reference 
year of 2005. Adopting these measures could 
lead to a net increase of more than 2 million jobs 
in the Brazilian economy in 2030 when compared 
to BAU, yielding benefits from the very first year. 
These measures would also reduce GHG emissions, 
exceeding Brazil’s current ambitious commitment 
under the Paris Agreement to reduce GHG 
emissions by 37 percent by 2025 versus 2005 level. 
The higher ambition NetZero scenario runs 
have even higher climate and sustainability 
20   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
ambition and provide even more considerable 
co-benefits. Such co-benefits extend to different 
areas and include a lower use of primary energy, 
more renewables in the electricity generation 
matrix (with no significant impacts in electricity 
prices), reduced deforestation while meeting 
food and energy demands, higher rates of land 
restoration, the leveraging of green investment 
to foster resilience, expanding market access 
among households and producers and improving 
equality, and enhanced agricultural productivity. 
Additional socioeconomic co-benefits have also been 
noted. They occur through several transmission 
channels (see “Channels of enhanced well-being 
associated with NEB policies”) and determine 
enhanced outcomes relative to the reference case. 
By highlighting the linkages among climate, 
environmental, and socioeconomic dimensions, 
NEB’s technical work allows us to understand 
the potential of low-carbon policies to attain 
inclusive development outcomes in Brazil. From 
an analytical standpoint, NEB provides a thorough 
examination of relevant domains (global, national, 
sectoral) and their interactions. Additional 
opportunities for new research under NEB include 
regional analyses (with particular focus on the 
Amazonia), distributional impact analyses based 
on micro-level data, and closer examinations of 
biodiversity and valuations of ecosystem services. 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   21
Appendix A: Generalized (high-
level) GEM Brazil structure
Figure A-1 presents the generalized underlying 
structure of GEM, the model used as a starting point 
for creating the GEM Brazil model. This diagram 
shows how the key capitals are interconnected, 
and contribute to shaping future trends across 
social, economic and environmental indicators. 
Specifically, feedback loops can be identified that are 
reinforcing (R) in all areas, pertaining to economic 
growth and social development. These are enabled 
by the availability of natural capital, which, if 
not properly managed, can constrain economic 
growth (hence the balancing loops -(B)- identified 
in the diagram). Policies can be implemented to 
promote sustainable consumption and production, 
decoupling economic growth from resource use 
(also through education and behavioral change), 
to mitigate the exploitation of natural capital and 
generate a stronger and more resilient green growth.
Source: Forrester, 2002; Bassi, 2015 . 
Figure A1 
Casual Loop Diagram (CLD) representing the main variables and feedback loops of GEM 
applications
22   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
Appendix B: Summary of 
COVID-19 impacts 
Different impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are 
identified below. Effects are manifested across 
all economic sectors. The figures and equations 
below use the industry sector as an example. 
GEM Brazil does not model drivers of infections 
(and associated deaths), nor does it produce 
endogenous patterns and factors that could 
result from changes in epidemiological factors, 
social behavior, and policy responses. Instead, a 
calibration exercise is conducted—based on data 
from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook as well 
as other sources—that captures emerging short-
term economic dynamics associated with the 
pandemic. The modelers used the most recent 
IMF estimate of the impact of COVID-19 as well 
as the forecasts published in the World Economic 
Outlook. Instead of inputting COVID impacts as a 
fully exogenous variable, they have calibrated the 
impact via the four channels described, calibrating 
the model to match the observed and forecasted 
impacts on different variables, not only on GDP.
The elasticities capture endogenous industry 
sector structures for COVID-19 response, including 
potential different resolutions to the pandemic 
that could be incorporated in subsequent NEB 
stages. Initially, the primary economic concern 
of COVID-19 was its effect on labor: deaths and 
sick leaves due to the disease. Over the course 
of the pandemic, one was able to observe how 
different sectors had different adaptive capacity 
to the pandemic shock due to endogenous 
factors, and some sectors saw a surplus of 
labor while others experienced shortages.  
Figure B1 
Effect on capital stock
Figure B3 
Effect on total consumption
Figure B2 
Effect on industry employment
Figure B4 
Effect on savings
COVID-19 effect on capital industry = IF THEN ELSE (COVID-19 
switch = 1, IF THEN ELSE (Duration of COVID-19 impacts table 
(Time) > 0, (1 + ((Sinus for COVID-19 impacts + Magnitude of impact 
industry) * Duration of COVID-19 impacts table (Time))) ^ Elasticity of 
industry capital to COVID-19 impacts, 1),1)
COVID-19 impact on propensity to consume = IF THEN ELSE 
(COVID-19 switch = 1: AND: Duration of COVID-19 impacts table 
(Time) > 0, Average COVID-19 impact on employment ^ Elasticity of 
private consumption to COVID-19, 1)
COVID-19 effect on industry employment = IF THEN ELSE 
(COVID-19 switch = 1, 1 - (1 + Sinus for COVID-19 impacts) ^ Elasticity 
of industry employment to COVID-19 impacts * Duration of 
COVID-19 employment impacts table (Time) * Assumed reduction in 
industry employment from COVID-19, 1)
Share of savings for private investment = IF THEN ELSE (COVID-19 
switch = 1: AND: COVID-19 recovery switch = 1, Share of savings 
for private investments COVID-19 recovery table (Time), IF THEN 
ELSE (COVID-19 switch = 1, Share of savings for private investments 
COVID-19 table (Time), Share of savings for private investments 
table (Time)))
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   23
Appendix C: Summary tables 
with policy interventions included 
in the NEB scenarios 
Table C1 
Scenario inputs for policies/interventions/technology adoption
Table C2 
Direct outcomes for selected interventions
Notes: CSP = concentrated solar power; PV = photovoltaic .
Notes: CSP = concentrated solar power; PV = photovoltaic; PJ = petajoule; TWh = terawatt-hour . Direct outcomes include megawatts of 
power generation capacity by source and hectares of land affected; selected interventions include power generation and/or land-based 
emissions reduction .
24   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
Appendix D: Channels of 
transmission for low-carbon policies 
to GDP through productivity
EFFECT NAME EFFECT EQUATION
Effect of technology Tech ^ ELASTICITY OF INDUSTRY TFP TO TECHNOLOGY
Effect of emissions DELAY3I(relative annual energy CO 2e emissions ^ 
ELASTICITY OF TFP TO CO 2E EMISSIONS, 1, 1)
Effect of health care EFFECT OF HEALTH CARE ON LABOR PRODUCTIVITY TABLE (access to 
basic health care) ^ ELASTICITY OF INDUSTRY TFP TO HEALTH CARE
Effect of literacy rate EFFECT OF LITERACY RATE ON LABOR PRODUCTIVITY TABLE (average 
adult literacy rate) ^ ELASTICITY OF INDUSTRY TFP TO EDUCATION
Effect of energy bill DELAY3I(relative energy bill as a share of GDP ^ ELASTICITY 
OF ENERGY BILL ON INDUSTRY TFP, 1, 1)
Effect of wastewater treatment DELAY1I((1 - share of n release cost in total real GDP) ^ ELASTICITY 
OF TFP TO N RELEASE INTO THE ENVIRONMENT, 1, 0  .95)
Table D1 
Equations used to calculate the effect of drivers of total factor productivity
Figure D1 
Productivity drivers
Notes: CO2e = carbon dioxide equivalent; GDP = gross domestic product; N = nitrogen; TFP = total factor productivity .
Figure D-1 and Table D-1 further explain the set of 
productivity drivers under GEM Brazil, concerning 
the industry sector, with similar structures being 
introduced for the services and primary sectors.
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   25
Appendix E: Agriculture production 
and agriculture GDP
The value of agriculture GDP is computed from 
agriculture production and value added per 
tonne of production and adjusted for production 
lost during transport to market. Agriculture 
production, in turn, is the sum of that from 
sustainable and conventional methods. Value 
added per tonne of production is a function, among 
other things, of the availability of infrastructure 
services. NEB policies allow for improvement 
on several dimensions, including yields per 
unit of land, reduction of preharvest losses, 
postharvest losses, including road infrastructure 
improvements, and other transport sector policies.
Figure E1 
Sustainable agriculture production
Figure E2 
Conventional agriculture production
Figure E3 
Value added per ton of production
Sustainable agriculture production = Sustainable agriculture land * Yield per hectare of sustainable agriculture * (1 - (“Share of preharvest 
losses table” (Time) / Effect of agriculture road infrastructure on food losses - correction factor for preharvest crop losses))
Conventional agriculture production = traditional land of agriculture * yield per hectare of conventional agriculture * (1 (IF THEN ELSE 
(NEB policy switch =1, "Share of preharvest losess table NEB" (Time)/Effect of agriculture road infrastructure on food losses, "Share of 
preharvest losses table" (Time)/Effect of agriculture road infrastructure on food losses) - Correction factor for crop losses preharvest )). 
Notes: NEB =- New Economy for Brazil; TFP = total factor productivity; AG = agriculture.
Value added per tonne of production = Value added per tonne of production table (Time) * Effect of agriculture road infrastructure on 
food losses * (1 + Initial share of production lost during transport to market + Correction factor for reductions in AG GDP)
Notes: AG = agriculture; GDP = gross domestic product.
26   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
Abbreviations
BAU  business as usual
BECCS   bioenergy with carbon 
capture and storage
BLUES   Brazilian Land Use and 
Energy Systems
BTL  biomass to liquid 
CCS  carbon capture and storage
CGE  computable general equilibrium
CLD  causal loop diagram 
COFFEE  Computable Framework for 
Energy and the Environment
COPPE   Alberto Luiz Coimbra Institute 
for Graduate Studies and 
Research in Engineering 
CO2  carbon dioxide
CO2e  carbon dioxide equivalent
CSP  concentrated solar power
GDP  gross domestic product
GEM Brazil Green Economy Model 
GHG  greenhouse gas 
HDI  Human Development Index
IAM  integrated assessment model
IMP  illustrative mitigation pathway
IPCC   Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change
IPPU  industrial processes and product use
NCE  New Climate Economy
NDC  nationally determined contribution 
NEB  New Economy for Brazil
N2O   nitrous oxide
PM2.5  particulate matter 
PV  photovoltaic
RCP   Representative 
Concentration Pathway
SCC  social cost of carbon
SD  system dynamics 
SO2   sulfur dioxide 
SRES  Special Report on Climate Scenarios
SSP  Shared Socioeconomic Pathway
TEA  Total Economy Assessment
TFP  total factor productivity 
UFRJ  Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UNFCCC   United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   27
Endnotes
1 . To learn more about WRI Brasil, visit https://www .wribrasil .org .
br/; for more information about NCE, see https://newclima-
teeconomy .net/ .
2 . According to the UNFCCC (n .d .), the Atmospheric Stabilization 
Framework (ASF) Model is an “integrated assessment model, 
which provides a framework for developing scenarios of future 
emissions based on consistent demographic, economic, and 
technological assumptions . Its strength is in its links between 
the use of biofuels, land use, technological development and 
GHG policy . It is therefore an appropriate tool for evaluating 
the land-use impacts of response measures .” 
3 . Regional distributional aspects are also of primary interest for 
NEB but are being tackled in a new phase for the initiative, 
under the so-called New Economy for the Amazonia (NEA) .
4 . See Figure SPM .5: Illustrative Mitigation Emissions Pathways 
(IMPs) and net zero CO2 and GHG emissions strategies in IPCC 
(2022) . 
5 . CenergiaLab was established in 2002 as one of the research 
branches of the Energy Planning Program of COPPE/UFRJ . 
See Cenergia’s publications and peer-reviewed research: 
https://www .cenergialab .coppe .ufrj .br/publications-1 .
6 . The BLUES model is a perfect-foresight, least-cost optimiza-
tion model for Brazil . It chooses the energy system config-
uration with the least total system cost over the entire time 
horizon of the study, in this case 2010–50 . The model minimiz-
es the costs of the entire energy system, including electricity 
generation, agriculture, industry, transport, and the buildings 
sectors . BLUES finds optimized mixes for the energy system as 
a whole rather than evaluating sectorial optimal solutions . It in-
cludes CO2, methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions 
associated with land use, agriculture, and livestock; fugitive 
emissions; fuel combustion; industrial processes; and waste 
treatment . Link to the model: https://www .iamconsortium .org/
resources/model-resources/brazilian-land-use-and-energy-
system-blues/ .
7 . Soft-linking is a method designed to jointly/iteratively use the 
top-down CGE models for a country’s economy and bottom-up 
energy system optimization models . This method allows two 
models to operate together, in an iterative process, until they 
converge on the values of price and quantity parameters in 
both models . Hard-linking integrates two models . Solutions 
are found through simultaneous optimization, not iteration 
(Krook-Riekkola et al . 2017) .
8 . It is noteworthy that the demands of the energy sector in the 
COFFEE and BLUES models are demands for energy services, 
in which the models are free to choose the portfolio of final 
sources of energy that can meet these demands through 
different energy end use technologies (different types of vehi-
cles, thermoelectric power plants, industrial boilers, residential 
water heaters, etc .) . In the case of the land use modules, the 
demands are for agricultural products, considering the domes-
tic and foreign markets provided by the TEA model .
9 . There are two ways of building future projections . One fo-
cuses on measuring/predicting the anticipated output from a 
given input (factor) . Another approach is exploratory; it seeks 
to understand how a certain scenario will reflect on the perfor-
mance and dynamics of the system as well as the nature and 
magnitude of changes in the interconnected system elements . 
The models described herein are in the latter family of analyti-
cal tools . 
10 . In a reinforcing loop, a change in one direction is compound-
ed by more change . Policies or shocks that move a variable in 
one direction transmit through the system in a way that leads 
to further movement in the same direction in such a variable 
over time . For example, money in a savings account generates 
interest, which increases the balance in the savings account 
and earns more interest . Balancing loops, in contrast, counter 
change in one direction with change in the opposite direction .
11 . The use of stocks and flows, along with feedback structures, 
nonlinearities, and potential delays are at the heart of SD 
modeling . By capturing these core features that characterize 
systems (e .g ., land, energy, economic) SD modeling can repro-
duce behavior . Indeed, SD is based on the fundamental idea 
that the structure of a system determines its behavior over 
time .
12 . GEM Brazil includes a total of 993 variables and data inputs, 
including 91 endogenously determined stocks/levels and 638 
endogenously determined auxiliary variables (including flows) . 
Whereas many of those endogenous variables are of primary 
interest to policymakers (e .g ., the level and growth rate of per 
capita GDP; the level and ratio of employment; and the GHG 
emissions, total and by source), others are informative for poli-
cy (e .g ., the amount of primary forest, the level and distribution 
of energy demand, and the social cost of carbon) .
13 . GEM Brazil, being a large model in terms of number of vari-
ables included for several dimensions (climate, the environ-
ment, and the social economy) and the coverage of sectors 
and technologies, includes a large number of feedback loops 
(over 11,000) . Many are major loops directly included in models 
as part of the conceptualization and customization process, in 
what is called the causal loop diagram (CLD) building exercise . 
Many others emerge naturally from the process of transform-
ing CLDs into consistent mathematical representations .
14 . At this stage of NEB, GEM Brazil does not incorporate direct 
effects of biodiversity changes in GDP via TFP because the 
estimation of the latter is made at a high level and based on 
land cover changes only, which does not provide sufficient 
certainty about the change in the value of the biodiversity 
variable . More detailed work on biodiversity is expected under 
a new NEB phase, at which time the linkages to TFP and GDP 
will be made . NEA, also known as the New Economy for the 
Brazilian Amazon Project, also investigates related issues .
15 . A GEM-related SD model produced for Indonesia—referred to 
as Indonesia Vision 2045, which is part of the country’s Low 
Carbon Development Initiative led by the Ministry of National 
Planning—does include such specific structural representation 
for the COVID-19 epidemic (Medrilzam et al . 2021), based on 
the so-called susceptible-infected-recovered model (Fidda-
mann 2020) . Under a new phase of NEB, GEM Brazil could 
incorporate a structural representation of COVID-19 consider-
ing the likelihood that the pandemic may not have a short-term 
resolution and that important tail effects could eventually 
persist .
28   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
References 
Bassi, A .M . 2015 . “Moving towards Integrated 
Policy Formulation and Evaluation: The Green 
Economy Model (GEM) .” Environmental and Climate 
Technologies 16 (1): 5–19 . https://doi .org/10 .1515/
rtuect-2015-0009 .
Bassi, A ., and G . Pallaske . 2020 . Technical 
Documentation GEM Brazil—Integration of GEM and 
BLUES Models. Geneva: KnowlEdge .
CE Delft, 2017 . Handboek Milieuprijzen 2017 . S .M . 
de Bruyn, S . Ahdour, M, Bijleveld, L . de Graaff, A . 
Schroten . Delft
Cristaldo, H . 2020 . “Brazil Ranks 84th in World’s 
Human Development Index .” Agência Brasil, 
December 16 . https://agenciabrasil .ebc .com .br/
en/geral/noticia/2020-12/brazil-ranks-84th-worlds-
human-development-index . 
Cunha, B .S .L ., R . Garaffa, and A .C . Gurgel . 2020 . “TEA 
Model Documentation .” Agro Working Paper 001 . São 
Paulo: São Paulo School of Economics . 
de Carvalho Köberle, A . 2018 . “Implementation of 
Land Use in an Energy System Model to Study the 
Long-Term Impacts of Bioenergy in Brazil and its 
Sensitivity to the Choice of Agricultural Greenhouse 
Gas Emission Factors .” PhD diss ., Alberto Luiz 
Coimbra Institute for Graduate Studies and Research 
in Engineering, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro .
Dijkraaf E . and Vollebergh R .J . 2004 . Burn or bury? 
A social cost comparison of final waste disposal 
methods . Ecological Economics, 2004, vol . 50, issue 
3-4, 233-247
Environmental Prices . CE Delft - https://cedelft .eu/
method/environmental-prices/
Federative Republic of Brazil, Paris Agreement 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) . 2022 . 
Brasília, 21 March -  https://unfccc .int/sites/default/files/
NDC/2022-06/Updated%20-%20First%20NDC%20
-%20%20FINAL%20-%20PDF .pdf
Fiddamann, T . 2020 . “MSU Covid--What Will 
Tomorrow Bring?” https://metasd .com/2020/10/msu-
covid-will-tomorrow-bring/ .
Forrester, J . 2002 . Road Maps: A Guide to Learning 
System Dynamics . Cambridge, MA: Sloan School of 
Management, Massachusetts Institute of T echnology .
Frederick, K .D ., T . Van den Berg, and J . Hanson . 1996 . 
“Economic Values of Freshwater in the United States .” 
Discussion Paper 97-03 . Washington, DC: Resources 
for the Future . https://media .rff .org/documents/RFF-
DP-97-03 .pdf .
Garrido, L ., and A . Bassi . 2022 . “Green Economy 
Modelling Framework: A T echnical Note .” Washington, 
DC: New Climate Economy .
Guan, D ., D . Wang, S . Hallegatte, S .J . Davis, J . Huo, 
S . Li, Y . Bai, et al . 2020 . “Global Supply-Chain Effects 
of COVID-19 Control Measures .” Nature Human 
Behavior 4 (June): 577–87 . https://doi .org/10 .1038/
s41562-020-0896-8 .
Hänsel, M .C ., M .A . Drupp, D .J .A . Johansson, F . Nesje, 
C . Azar, M .C . Freeman, B . Groom, and T . Sterner . 
2020 . “Climate Economics Support for the UN Climate 
Targets .” Nature Climate Change 10 (August): 781–89 . 
https://doi .org/10 .1038/s41558-020-0833-x .
Hausfather, Z . 2018 . “Explainer: How ‘Shared 
Socioeconomic Pathways’ Explore Future 
Climate Change .” CarbonBrief, Arpil 19 . https://
www .carbonbrief .org/explainer-how-shared-
socioeconomic-pathways-explore-future-climate-
change/ .
16 . The SCC is an estimate, in dollars, of the economic damages 
that would result from emitting one additional tonne of GHGs 
into the atmosphere . Specifically, it refers to the marginal cost 
of the impacts caused by emitting one extra tonne of GHG 
(CO2 equivalent) at any point in time, inclusive of “nonmarket” 
impacts on the environment and human health .
17 . Note that this refers to exogenous assumption of SCC . The 
cost of externalities is global—not specific to Brazil—but is 
accepted and approved for use in SCC estimations . 
18 . Externalities could be viewed as a portion of the cost in the 
production, which is not incurred by the producer nor by the 
consumer but is born by the society, the state, and the “other 
people .” Somebody must “foot the bill .” Since externalities 
are not included in the estimation of cost, they lead to market 
distortions . If the producer bore the full cost, including the ex-
ternalities, some of the activities/products would be economi-
cally unfeasible or the market price would be higher . 
19 . Moreover, macroeconomic scenario analyses fail to consider 
the effects of climate and natural capital depletion and deg-
radation on baselines . Thus, differential impacts between the 
baseline and low-carbon, green scenarios over key socioeco-
nomic indicators are even larger than normally thought . 
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   29
Helper, S ., and E . Soltas . 2021 . “Why the Pandemic 
Has Disrupted Supply Chains .” White House Council 
of Economic Advisers Blog, June 17 . https://www .
whitehouse .gov/cea/written-materials/2021/06/17/
why-the-pandemic-has-disrupted-supply-chains/ .
IMF (International Monetary Fund) . 2021 . “World 
Economic Outlook Update: Policy Support and 
Vaccines Expected to Lift Activity .” Washington, 
DC: IMF . https://www .imf .org/en/Publications/WEO/
Issues/2021/01/26/2021-world-economic-outlook-
update .
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) . 
2000 . Summary for Policymakers Emissions 
Scenarios. A Special Report of Working Group III of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
edited by N . Nakicenovic and R . Swart . Cambridge 
and New Y ork: Cambridge University Press . https://
www .ipcc .ch/report/emissions-scenarios/ .
IPCC . 2022 . Climate Change 2022: Impacts, 
Adaptation and Vulnerability . Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
edited by H .-O . Pörtner, D .C . Roberts, M . Tignor, E .S . 
Poloczanska, K . Mintenbeck, A . Alegría, M . Craig, et 
al . Cambridge and New Y ork: Cambridge University 
Press . https://doi .org/10 .1017/9781009325844 . 
Kaye, A .D ., C .N . Okeagu, A .D . Pham, R .A . Silva, J .J . 
Hurley, B .L . Arron, N . Sarfraz, et al . 2020 . “Economic 
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Healthcare 
Facilities and Systems: International Perspectives .” 
Best Practice & Research: Clinical Anaesthesiology 
35 (November): 293–306 . https://doi .org/10 .1016/j .
bpa .2020 .11 .009 .
Kirti, D ., Y . Liu, S .M . Peria, P . Mishra, and J . Strasky . 
2022 . “Tracking Economic and Financial Policies 
during COVID-19: An Announcement-Level 
Database .” Working Paper 2022/114 . Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund .
Krook-Riekkola, A ., C . Berg, E .O . Ahlgren, and P . 
Soderholm . 2017 . “Challenges in T op-Down and 
Bottom-Up Soft-Linking: Lessons from Linking 
a Swedish Energy System Model with a CGE 
Model .” Energy 141 (December): 803–17 . https://doi .
org/10 .1016/j .energy .2017 .09 .107 .
Leahy, J ., and S . Wagstyl . 2012 . “Brazil Becomes 
Sixth Biggest Economy .” Financial Times, March 6 . 
https://www .ft .com/content/e23a2b34-678e-11e1-b4a1-
00144feabdc0 . 
Meadows, D .H . 1980 . “The Unavoidable A Priori .” In 
Elements of the System Dynamics Method, edited by 
J . Randers, 23–57 . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press .
M . Medrilzam, L . Garrido, S . Ida, I . Darliazi-Y ananto, E . 
Suarga, A . Wijaya, M . Davis, A . Harsono, K . Connolly, 
and Y . Akopian . 2021 . A Green Economy for a Net-
Zero Future: How Indonesia Can Build Back Better 
after COVID-19 with the Low-Carbon Development 
Initiative (LCDI) . Jakarta: Ministry of Development 
Planning of Indonesia . https://lcdi-indonesia .id/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/GE-Report-English-8-Oct-
lowres .pdf .
Nakicenovic, N ., J . Alcamo, G . Davis, B . de Vries, J . 
Fenhann, S . Gaffin, K . Gregory, et al . 2000 . Special 
Report on Emissions Scenarios. A Special Report 
of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, edited by N . Nakicenovic and 
R . Swart . Cambridge and New Y ork: Cambridge 
University Press . https://www .ipcc .ch/report/
emissions-scenarios/ .
NCE (New Climate Economy) . 2018 . Unlocking 
the Inclusive Growth Story of the 21st Century . 
Washington, DC: NCE, World Resources Institute . 
https://newclimateeconomy .report/2018/wp-content/
uploads/sites/6/2018/09/NCE_2018_FULL-REPORT .
pdf .
Nordhaus, W .D . 2006 . “The ‘Stern Review’ on the 
Economics of Climate Change .” Working Paper 
12741 . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research . https://doi .org/10 .3386/w12741 .
Nordhaus, W .D . 2017a . “Projection and Uncertainties 
about Climate Change in an Era of Minimum Climate 
Policies .” Working Paper 22933 . Cambridge, MA: 
National Bureau of Economic Research . https://www .
nber .org/system/files/working_papers/w22933/
w22933 .pdf .
Nordhaus, W .D . 2017b . “Revisiting the Social Cost 
of Carbon .” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America 114 (7): 
30   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
1518–23 . https://doi .org/10 .1073/pnas .1609244114 .
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development) . 2020 . “Coronavirus (COVID-19): SME 
Policy Responses .” July 15 . https://www .oecd .org/
coronavirus/policy-responses/coronavirus-covid-19-
sme-policy-responses-04440101/ .
OECD . 2022 . (Database) . Key COVID-19 Policy 
Responses from the OECD . https://www .oecd .org/
coronavirus/en/policy-responses .
PIK (Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research) . 
2020 . “An Economic Case for the UN Climate Targets: 
Early and Strong Climate Action Pays Off.” July 13 . 
https://www .pik-potsdam .de/en/news/latest-news/an-
economic-case-for-the-un-climate-targets-early-and-
strong-climate-action-pays-off . 
Probst, G ., and A . Bassi . 2014 . Tackling Complexity: A 
Systematic Approach for Decision Makers . London: 
Routledge . https://doi .org/10 .4324/9781351287647 .
Randers, J . 1980 . Elements of the System Dynamics 
Method . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press .
Riahi, K ., D .P . Van Vuuren, E . Krigler, J . Edmonds, 
B .C . O’Neill, S . Fujimori, N . Bauer, et al . 2017 . 
“The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and Their 
Energy, Land Use, and Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Implications: An Overview .” Global Environmental 
Change 42 (January): 153–68 . https://doi .org/10 .1016/j .
gloenvcha .2016 .05 .009 .
Richardson, G ., and A . Pugh . 1981 . Introduction 
to System Dynamics with Dynamo . Portland, OR: 
Productivity .
Roberts, N ., D . Andersen, R . Deal, M . Garet, and W . 
Shaffer . 1983 . Introduction to Computer Simulation: 
The System Dynamics Approach . Boston: Addison-
Wesley .
Romeiro, V ., et al . 2020 . “A New Economy for a 
New Era: Elements for Building a More Efficient and 
Resilient Economy in Brazil .” Working Paper . São 
Paulo: WRI Brasil . https://www .wribrasil .org .br/sites/
default/files/wribrasil_neweconomyforanewera_
en .pdf .
Rochedo, P .R .R . 2016 . “Development of a Global 
Integrated Energy Model to Evaluate the Brazilian 
Role in Climate Change Mitigation Scenarios .” PhD 
diss ., Alberto Luiz Coimbra Institute for Graduate 
Studies and Research in Engineering, Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro . http://www .ppe .ufrj .
br/images/publica%C3%A7%C3%B5es/doutorado/
Pedro_Rua_Rodriguez_Rochedo .pdf .Stern, N ., and S . 
Dietz . 2008 . Why Economic Analysis Supports Strong 
Action on Climate Change . London: London School of 
Economics .
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) . 
2000 . New Atlas of Human Development in Brazil: 
1991–2000. New Y ork: UNDP .
UNDP . 2020 . Human Development Country Insights. 
New Y ork: UNDP .
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change) . n .d . “Integrated Assessment 
Models (IAMs) and Energy-Environment-Economy 
(E3) Models .”  https://unfccc .int/topics/mitigation/
workstreams/response-measures/modelling-tools-
to-assess-the-impact-of-the-implementation-of-
response-measures/integrated-assessment-models-
iams-and-energy-environment-economy-e3-models .
van Ypersele, J .-P . 2010 . “Update on Scenario 
Development: From SRES to RCPs .” Bonn, Germany: 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change Secretariat .
World Bank . n .d .a . “GDP, PPP (current international 
$)—Brazil .” https://data .worldbank .org/indicator/
NY .GDP .MKTP .PP .CD?locations=BR . 
World Bank . n .d .b . “Population, total—Brazil .” 
https://data .worldbank .org/indicator/SP .POP .
TOTL?locations=BR .
NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS   |   31
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Danish Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs for its support and funding of this 
project, as well as our technical partners KnowlEdge 
SRL . 
We also thank the Brazilian experts and institutions 
that partnered with us for the report, “A New Economy 
for a New Era: Elements for Building a More Efficient 
and Resilient Economy in Brazil” (2020), which this 
technical note expands upon: Pontifical Catholic 
University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-RJ), Climate Policy 
Initiative (CPI), Alberto Luiz Coimbra Institute for 
Graduate Studies and Research in Engineering of 
the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (COPPE/
UFRJ), Institute for Applied Economic Research 
(IPEA), Brazilian Federation of Banks (FEBRABAN), 
and Brazilian Business Council for Sustainable 
Development (CEBDS) . 
We thank the following people for providing technical 
assistance and feedback during the drafting of 
this working paper: Juan Carlos Altamirano, Andre 
Lucena, Deepthi Swamy, Gloria Ferrayra, Kenia de 
Souza, Mariana Imperio, Paulo Camuri and Roberto 
Schaeffer . 
Thank you to the New Climate Economy and WRI 
Brasil teams for their support throughout the project, 
including, but not limited to: Caroline Rocha, Joana 
Oliveira, Sara Ascher, Andrea Mendez, Y elena 
Akopian, Alex Simpkins, and Pandora Batra . Thank 
you to Romain Warnault, Lauri Scherer and Billie 
Kanfer for editorial and layout .
About the Authors
Leonardo Garrido, Ph.D.: NCE Lead Economist 
at the time of advancing this research, currently 
independent climate economics consultant .  
Contact: oikonomo@gmail .com
Andrea M. Bassi, Ph.D.: expert in System Dynamics 
and green economy strategies and scenarios, 
KnowlEdge Srl . 
Contact: andrea .bassi@ke-srl .com
Georg Pallaske: specialist in System Dynamics and 
sustainability assessments, KnowlEdge Srl . 
Contact: georg .pallaske@ke-srl .com
Iryna Payosova, Ph.D.: is an Economist with WRI New 
Climate Economy . 
Contact: iryna .payosova@wri .org
Arya Harsono: is a Research Analyst with WRI New 
Climate Economy . 
Contact: arya .harsono@wri .org
About WRI Brasil
WRI Brasil is a research institute that transforms 
great ideas into actions to promote environmental 
protection, economic opportunity and human well-
being . It works in the development of studies and 
implementation of sustainable solutions in climate, 
forests and cities . It combines technical excellence 
with political articulation and works in partnership with 
governments, companies, academia and civil society . 
WRI Brasil is part of the World Resources Institute 
(WRI), a global research institution operating in more 
than 60 countries . WRI relies on the expertise of 
approximately 1,700 professionals in offices in Brazil, 
China, the United States, Europe, Mexico, India, 
Indonesia and Africa .
About the New Climate Economy
The New Climate Economy (NCE), a flagship project 
of the Global Commission on the Economy and 
Climate, brings together government, business and 
economic leaders to enhance global and national 
understanding of how climate action can drive 
economic, social and development objectives . 
32   |   NEW ECONOMY FOR BRAZIL: EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND SCENARIO ANAL YSIS
WRI Brasil 
Rua Cláudio Soares, 72  Cj. 1510 
05422-030 | São Paulo (SP) 
Tel.: +55 11 3032-1120
Av. Independência, 1299 Cj. 401 
90035-077 | Porto Alegre (RS) 
Tel.: +55 51 3312-6324
wribrasil.org.br
New Climate Economy
c/o World Resources Institute 
10 G St NE 
Suite 800 
Washington, DC 20002, USA 
+1 (202) 729-7600
www.newclimateeconomy.net
Copyright 2023 World Resources Institute. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License. To view a copy of the license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/