OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 1776
Promoting gender equality
to strengthen economic
growth and resilience
Christophe André,
Orsetta Causa,
Emilia Soldani,
Douglas Sutherland,
Filiz Unsal
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/54090c29-en
 
 
 
  
 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
 ECO/WKP(2023)29 
Unclassified English - Or. English 
13 November 2023 
ECONOMICS DEPARTMENT 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND 
RESILIENCE 
ECONOMICS DEPARTMENT WORKING PAPERS No. 1776 
 
 
By Christophe André, Orsetta Causa, Emilia Soldani, Douglas Sutherland and Filiz Unsal  
 
 
OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or of its 
member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are those of the author(s).  
 
Authorised for publication by Alvaro Pereira, Director, Policy Studies Branch, Economics Department. 
 
All Economics Department Working Papers are available at www.oecd.org/eco/workingpapers. 
 
 
  
JT03531561 
OFDE 
 
This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the 
delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area. 
2  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
 
OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or of its 
member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are those of the author(s). 
Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progress by the author(s) and are published 
to stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD works.  
Comments on Working Papers are welcomed, and may by e-mail to the Economics Department. 
All Economics Department Working Papers are available at www.oecd.org/eco/workingpapers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any 
territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city 
or area. 
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. 
The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem 
and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law. 
© OECD (2023) 
You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from 
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs, 
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright 
owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to 
PubRights@oecd.org.  
ECO/WKP(2023)29  3 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
ABSTRACT/RÉSUMÉ 
Promoting gender equality to strengthen economic growth and resilience 
Women’s employment rates and wages are still lagging those of men across OECD countries, with average 
employment and wage gaps now around 15% and 12% respectively. Gaps narrowed at a relatively modest 
pace over the past decade, calling for further policy action. A lack of affordable high -quality childcare is 
often an obstacle to women’s participation in the labour market and notably to working full time. A very 
unequal sharing of parental leave between parents and challenges upon return to work further hampers 
women’s careers. B iases in the tax system  may discourage women from working in some countries. 
Women face disadvantage in accessing management positions and entrepreneurship. A range of policies 
can help reduce gender gaps, including better  childcare provision, incentivising parents to better share 
parental leave, re-skilling and upskilling on return from parental leave, encouraging gender equality within 
firms, integration programmes for foreign-born women, promoting women entrepreneurship and financial 
inclusion, and levelling taxation for second earners. Moreover, the multiple dimensions and root causes of 
gender inequality call for mainstreaming gender across policy domains. 
JEL codes: D63, H24, I24, J13, J15, J16, J71, J78, L26, M53. 
Keywords: Childcare, Economics of Gender, Education, Entrepreneurship, Financial inclusion, Gender 
equality, Immigration, Inequality, Labour discrimination, Parental leave, Taxation, Training.  
************ 
Promouvoir l'égalité des genres pour renforcer la croissance économique et la résilience  
Les taux d'emploi et les salaires des femmes restent inférieurs à ceux des hommes dans les pays de 
l'OCDE, avec des écarts moyens d'emploi et de salaire désormais autour de 15% et 12% respectivement. 
Les écarts se sont réduits à un rythme relativement modeste au cours de la dernière décennie, ce qui 
appelle de nouvelles mesures politiques. Le manque de services de garde d'enfants abordables et leur 
qualité insuffisante constituent souvent un obstacle à la participation des femmes au marché du travail et 
notamment au travail à temps plein. Un partage très inégal du congé parental entre les parents et les 
difficultés rencontrées lors du retour au travail entravent encore davantage les carrières des femmes. Les 
biais du système fiscal peuvent décourager les femmes de travailler dans certains pays. Les femmes sont 
désavantagées dans l’accès aux postes de direction et à l’entrepreneuriat. Différentes politiques peuvent 
contribuer à réduire les écarts entre les genres, notamment une meilleure offre de garde d'enfants, 
l'incitation des parents à mieux partager le congé parental, la reconversion et l a formation au retour du 
congé parental, l'encouragement de l'égalité des genres a u sein des entreprises, des programmes 
d'intégration pour les femmes nées à l'étranger, la promotion de l’entrepreneuriat féminin et l’inclusion 
financière, ainsi que l’égalisation d e la fiscalité sur les deuxièmes apporteurs de revenu . En outre, les 
multiples dimensions et causes profondes des inégalités de genre soulignent l’importance d’intégrer  la 
dimension de genre dans tous les domaines de l’action publique. 
Classification JEL: D63, H24, I24, J13, J15, J16, J71, J78, L26, M53. 
Mots-clés: Garde d'enfants, Économie du genre, Éducation, Entrepreneuriat, Inclusion financière, Égalité 
des genres, Immigration, Inégalités, Discrimination au travail, Congé parental, Fiscalité, Formation.  
  
4  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Table of contents 
Promoting gender equality to strengthen economic growth and resilience 5 
1. Introduction 5 
2. Women’s employment is still lagging in many countries 6 
3. Gender wage gaps and glass ceilings persist 8 
4. Women tend to be more vulnerable to economic shocks and poverty  12 
5. Policies can support female employment and foster equal opportunities  13 
5.1. Broad and affordable access to childcare and early childhood education is crucial  14 
5.2. Promoting work-life balance for both men and women through parental leave 
arrangements 16 
5.3. Facilitating the return to work after an extended parental leave through training  18 
5.4. Supporting gender-balanced career advancements through corporate disclosure 18 
5.5. Addressing biases in the tax and pension systems 18 
5.6. Better integrating foreign-born women through tailored labour-market programmes 19 
5.7. Promoting women’s access to management positions and entrepreneurship  19 
5.8. Enhancing women’s financial inclusion 19 
5.9. Mainstreaming gender across policies 20 
References 21 
 
Figures 
Figure 1. Gender equality is associated with high income per capita 6 
Figure 2. Gender employment gaps vary widely across countries 7 
Figure 3. Involuntary part-time is more prevalent among women 8 
Figure 4. Foreign-born women tend to have lower employment rates than natives 8 
Figure 5. Gender wage gaps remain wide in most countries 9 
Figure 6. Girls perform better than boys in education 10 
Figure 7. Fewer women graduate in Science, ICT and engineering 10 
Figure 8. Women remain under-represented in management 11 
Figure 9. Fewer women than men are entrepreneurs 12 
Figure 10. Women are at higher risk of poverty than men in most countries 13 
Figure 11. More gender-inclusive labour markets is a priority for many countries 14 
Figure 12. Enrolment in early education varies widely across countries and income groups 15 
Figure 13. High childcare costs can generate high financial disincentives to enter employment 15 
Figure 14. Parental leave entitlements are still very uneven between parents 17 
 
Boxes 
Box 1. Addressing barriers to parents working in the United Kingdom 16 
Box 2. The Australian National Strategy for gender equality 17 
 
 
ECO/WKP(2023)29  5 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
By Christophe André, Orsetta Causa, Emilia Soldani, Douglas Sutherland and Filiz Unsal 1 
1.  Introduction 
1. The COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, and the current cost -of-
living crisis have affected women’s incomes, job opportunities and security (OECD, 2020a; European 
Parliament, 2023; Charlton, 2023). Long-standing factors such as climate change, the digital transition and 
population ageing also entail risks of widening gender gaps. Women are more vulnerable to economic 
shocks, may be less well-placed to seize the opportunities associated with the green and digital transitions 
as they tend to specialise less in scientific knowledge than men, and shoulder a disproportionate share of 
care for elderly relatives. This paper draws on a wide range of previous OECD studies on gender equality 
to document employment and wage gender gaps across OECD countries, and their recent evolutions and 
underlying factors. It subsequently reviews policies put in place by governments to tackle gender inequality 
and outlines directions for further action.  
2. Gender employment and wage gaps have generally narrowed at a relatively modest pace over the 
past decade and remain significant, calling for further policy action. Key areas for progress include: 
broadening access to quality childcare and early childhood education and making them more affordable ; 
promoting better sharing of parental leave between parents and facilitating return to work through training; 
supporting gender -balanced career advancements through corporate disclosure; promoting women’s 
access to management positions and entrepreneurship; addressing biases in the tax and pension systems; 
better integrating foreign -born women through tailored labour -market programmes; enhancing women’s 
financial inclusion; and mainstreaming gender across policy domains. 
3. Lower gender inequality, as measured by the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap index, 
is generally associated with higher income per capita (Figure 1). Causality between higher gender equality 
and higher incomes runs in both directions (Duflo, 2012). High incomes and living standards generate 
more opportunities for women, including better access to health and education, as well as financial 
inclusion, which are key to empowering women. Higher levels of economic development are also generally 
 
1 Corresponding authors: Christophe André (Christophe.Andre@oecd.org) , Orsetta Causa (Orsetta.Caus@oecd.org), 
Emilia Soldani  (Emilia.Soldani@oecd.org), Douglas Sutherland (Douglas.Sutherland@oecd.org) and Filiz Unsal  
(Filiz.Unsal@oecd.org) are all members of the Policy Studies Branch of the OECD Economics Department. This paper 
was first released in the OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2023 Issue 1 (June 2023). The authors are grateful to Dr. 
Betsey Stevenson (University of Michigan) and OECD Economic Policy Committee delegates, as well as Sebastian 
Barnes, Hélia Costa, L uiz de Mello, Alain de Serres , Priscilla Fialho, Daniela Glocker, Nigel Pain, and Sebastien 
Turban (all from the OECD Economics Department) and other OECD Economics Department colleagues for useful 
comments and suggestions. They would also like to thank Jé rôme Brézillon (OECD Economics Department) for 
excellent research assistance and Isabelle Fakih and Sarah Michelson -Sarfati (both from the OECD Economics 
Department) for excellent editorial support. All remaining errors remain ours. 
Promoting gender equality to strengthen 
economic growth and resilience 
6  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
associated with more economic and political rights and opportunities for individuals, especially women. 
Gender equality contributes to higher well -being primarily by reducing gaps in education, health, labour 
participation and job quality. Greater equality of opportunities between men and women woul d enhance 
social mobility, foster inclusiveness and boost economic growth through better use of talent.  
Figure 1. Gender equality is associated with high income per capita 
  
Note: A higher score indicates a lower gender gap.  The gender gap index is produced by the World Economic Forum to benchmark progress 
towards gender parity and compare countries' gender gaps across four dimensions: economic opportunities, education, health an d political 
leadership. 
Source: World Economic Forum; and OECD Productivity Database. 
4. The literature points to a strong effect of gender equality on national income. At the 
macroeconomic level, in a growth model with endogenous saving, fertility and labour market participation 
calibrated on the United  States, a 50% increase in the gender wage gap eventually leads to a 35% 
decrease in income per capita in the steady state (Cavalcanti and Tavares, 2016). Gender inequality also 
explains a large part of some other countries’ income gap with the United State s. Another study finds that 
gender gaps cause an average income loss of 15% in the OECD, of which 40% is due to entrepreneurship 
gaps (Cuberes and Teignier, 2016). Across OECD countries, closing gender gaps in labour force 
participation and working hours c ould lift GDP by more than 9% by 2060, adding about a quarter of a 
percentage point to average annual growth (OECD, 2023a). 
5. OECD research at the firm level shows that differences in gender diversity contribute significantly 
to the productivity gap between frontier firms, those with the highest productivity levels, and other firms 
(Criscuolo et al., 2021) . Enhanced equality of opportunities and social mobility can foster more inclusive 
and stable growth. Given the relationship between parental or socio -economic background and the 
educational and wage outcomes  of their offspring , better opportunities for women can enhanc e 
intergenerational social mobility (Causa and Johansson, 2010). This is crucial, as in an average OECD 
country it can take around four to five generations for children from the bottom earnings decile to attain the 
level of mean earnings (OECD, 2018a). Gend er diversity can also help economies recover faster from 
shocks and more broadly strengthen economic and financial resilience. Public policy has a role to play in 
supporting more inclusive outcomes. 
2.  Women’s employment is still lagging in many countries 
6. A gender employment gap persists in all OECD countries, although it has narrowed in most of 
them since 2010. Differences across countries are large, with the employment gap ranging from one 
percentage point in Lithuania to nearly 37 percentage points in Türkiye in 2021 (Figure 2). Employment 

ECO/WKP(2023)29  7 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
gaps tend to be wide in Latin  America, Southern Europe and Asia, and small in Eastern and Northern 
Europe. Such gaps are the result of various factors, including cultural and social norms. However, a lack 
of equal opportun ities, which is partly related to policy, contributes in many cases to women’s lower 
employment rate. 
Figure 2. Gender employment gaps vary widely across countries 
Difference in employment rates between men and women aged 15-64 
 
Source: OECD Employment database; and OECD calculations.  
7. The prevalence of part -time work is also higher among women. On average, about one in four 
women in the OECD works part -time, with lower rates in most of Eastern Europe and high er rates in the 
Netherlands, Switzerland and Japan. In many cases, part -time work may reflect work -life balance 
considerations. Nevertheless, involuntary part -time employment represents a larger share of female than 
of male employment in most OECD countries and exceeds  10% in Australia, Italy and Spain (Figure 3). 
The over-representation of women in involuntary part -time work makes them vulnerable to reductions in 
working time (OECD, 2020b). 
8. Employment of foreign-born women is particularly low in some countries (Figure 4). Differences in 
the gap with natives partly reflect differences in the skills of migrants across countries. The gap is especially 
wide where the employment rate of native women is high. One obstacle to the employment of foreign-born 
women in countries w ith a highly -skilled workforce is the lower average level of education among 
immigrants and the difficulty of getting foreign qualifications recognised. 
9. The unequal burden of family-related work contributes to a higher propensity of women to drop out 
of the labour force than men. On average across European countries, around 1.7% of employed and 4.6% 
of unemployed women in a given year move to inactivity to fulfil domestic tasks, compared to less than 
0.2% of employed and 1% of unemployed men (Causa et al., 2021). Long hours of unpaid work also reduce 
women’s well-being disproportionately compared to men, who are relatively more likely to have long hours 
of paid work (OECD, 2020c). However, the COVID -19 pandemic has triggered a reassessment of career 
objectives and work-life balance, both for men and women, which could lead to a better sharing of family 
tasks and greater life satisfaction (Stevenson, 2021). 

8  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Figure 3. Involuntary part-time is more prevalent among women 
Percentage of involuntary part-timers in total employment, 2021 or latest 
 
Note: Part-time employment is defined as people in employment (whether employees or self -employed) who usually work less than 30 hours 
per week in their main job. Employed people are those aged 15 and over who report that they have worked in gainful employment for at least 
one hour in the previous week or who had a job but were absent from work during the reference week while having a formal job attachment. 
Figure 4. Foreign-born women tend to have lower employment rates than natives 
Women aged 15-64, 2021 or latest 
 
Source: OECD Migration Statistics. 
3.  Gender wage gaps and glass ceilings persist 
10. Wage gaps remain wide, even though they have narrowed in seven  out of ten OECD countries 
since 2010 (Figure 5). On average, the gender wage gap was close to 12% in the OECD in 2022, but 
differences across countries were large. While the wage gap was around 1% in Belgium, it still exceeded 
30% in Korea, despite signif icant progress over the past decade. Part of the wage gaps reflects factors 
like age, education, occupation, sector of employment and hours worked. However, they may also reflect 
discrimination against women.  

ECO/WKP(2023)29  9 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
11. Recent studies suggest that factors unrelated to skills and work experience account for a 
substantial share of the gender wage gap. About three -quarters of the gender wage gap results from the 
same firm paying men more than women with similar skills, mainly due to differences in task and 
responsibility assignments. The remaining quarter of the gender wage gap results from the concentration 
of women in low-wage firms and industries (OECD, 2022a). However, the relative impact of objective and 
subjective factors in wage differences is still insufficiently  documented in many countries, which hinders 
corrective action. 
12. Recent OECD research using individual-level data on 25 European countries suggests that factors 
related to social norms, gender stereotypes and discrimination, account for 40% of the gender wa ge gap 
on average, while a motherhood penalty hindering women’s career and wage progression accounts for 
around 60% (Ciminelli et al., 2021). The first set of factors is predominant in most Northern and Western 
European countries, while the motherhood pena lty dominates in most Central and Eastern European 
countries. This calls for policy action tailored to countries’ specific challenges. 
13. Wage and employment gaps translate into pension gaps, as career interruptions lower women’s 
lifetime contributions to pen sion schemes. Women’s longer life expectancy can also expose them to 
erosion in the real value of pensions. Pension payments to women aged 65 and over in the 34 OECD 
countries for which data are available are on average about 25% lower than for men and gaps vary widely 
across countries, ranging from 3% in Estonia to 47% in Japan (OECD, 2021a).  
Figure 5. Gender wage gaps remain wide in most countries 
 
Note: The gender wage gap is defined as the difference between the median ear nings of men and women relative to the median earnings of 
men. Data refer to full-time employees. 
Source: OECD Gender Data Portal. 
14. Girls’ educational achievements in OECD countries are now generally better than those of boys 
(Figure 6). On average, 54% of 25-34-year-old women have attained tertiary education in 2021, compared 
to only 41% of men in the same age group (OECD, 2022b). However, girls are under-represented in some 
fields, such as  science, ICT and engineering, that often  lead to highly rewarding career opportunities 
(Figure 7). This is likely to reflect preferences, but also stereotypes. The specific impact of cultural norms 
is difficult to assess but studies have shown that girls, especially high-achieving ones, tend to underperform 
in mathematics because they generally have lower self-confidence in their ability to solve mathematics or 
science problems  than boys . They are also more likely to express strong feelings of anxiety towards 
mathematics. This fear of failure and lack of confidence in their abilities is often exacerbated by the gender 
stereotypes that girls face at home, in school and within their communities (Carlana, 2019; Encinas-Martín 

10  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
and Cherian, 2023). Children and youth are affected by gender stereotypes from an early age, with 
parental, school, teacher and peer factors influencing the way students internalise their gender identities. 
This results in expectations that girls will follow career paths to become nurses or teachers, while boys will 
pursue goals involving science, engineering or business and will occupy positions of leadership (Brussino 
and McBrien, 2022).  
15. Women may also be less well -placed than men to benefit from the opportunities offered by the 
green transition, although they will also be less affected by the disappearance of jobs in polluting activities. 
Fewer than one-third (28%) of green jobs in OECD countries are held by women (OECD, 2023b).  
Figure 6. Girls perform better than boys in education 
Per cent of 25-34-year-old population with tertiary education 
 
Source: OECD, Education at a Glance. 
Figure 7. Fewer women graduate in Science, ICT and engineering 
Per cent of graduate gender group  
 
Note: Includes natural sciences, mathematics and statistics, Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) and engineering. 
Reading note: In Greece, around 40% of tertiary graduate men graduate in Science, ICT and engineering, which contrasts with l ess than 20% 
of tertiary graduate women. 
Source: OECD Gender Data Portal. 

ECO/WKP(2023)29  11 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
16. Women are generally over -represented in relatively low -pay activities, especially in the public 
sector. Wages also tend to be lower in professions with a high proportion of women than in male-dominated 
occupations. To some extent, lower pay may result from lower productivity in so me female -dominated 
sectors, notably in services, than in male-dominated sectors. However, evidence from European countries 
and the United States suggests that lower wages in female -dominated professions could also result from 
undervaluation of the work do ne by women (Bettio and Verashchagina, 2009; Levanon et al., 2009). To 
the extent that l ower wages in female -dominated professions make them relatively unattractive to men, 
gender imbalances may be perpetuated. 
17. Women are still facing a glass ceiling. Even though it has increased in most countries over recent 
years, the average share of women on boards of listed companies in the OECD was only 28% in 2021. 
While this share is coming close to parity in countries lik e Iceland and France, it remains below 10% in 
Estonia, Hungary and Korea. Moreover, executive positions within boards are still rarely filled by women 
(Denis, 2022). Women also occupy less than a third of managerial positions on average (Figure 8). The 
under-representation of women in senior management warrants special attention not only from an equity 
point of view, but also because women in executive positions can have more of an impact on firm 
performance than as board members (Noland et al., 2016). Achi eving parity in management positions, 
especially at the most senior levels, may be more challenging and take more time than parity for company 
board members. Many managers are promoted internally, and maintaining a balance between internal and 
external promotions is often necessary to preserve experience and staff motivation.  
18. The slow progress in gender equality within businesses runs against evidence that greater 
diversity, in terms of gender , ethnicity, and  culture, can enhance firm performance. In a fast -moving 
business environment, more diverse groups are likely to be better at rapidly finding responses to problems 
and at spotting new opportunities. Woolley et al. (2010) find that collective intelligence, defined as the 
general ability to perform a wide variety of tasks, increases with the proportion of women in a group. 
Homogenous groups can suffer from narrowmindedness, groupthink – the tendency to agree with a group’s 
consensus without critical thinking – and over -confidence, whereas diversity fosters creativity and 
innovation through enhanced information processing and complex thinking (Galinsky et al., 2015). In 
addition to improved group decision-making, gender diversity can offer access to a larger pool of talent, a 
wider span of management skills, a better understanding of customer preferences, and improved corporate 
governance (Curtis et al., 2012). 
Figure 8. Women remain under-represented in management 
Female share of employment in managerial positions 
 
Source: OECD Gender Data Portal. 

12  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
19. Women are less likely than men to become entrepreneurs. Self -employed women who are 
employers account on average for slightly over 2% of total female employment in the OECD, while the 
corresponding figure for men is around 5½ per cent. The gap is wide in all OECD countries (Figure 9). 
Women in OECD countries are also 1.5 times less likely than men to be working on setting-up a business 
start-up. Even though this gap varies greatly across countries, there are  no OECD countr ies in which  
women are more active than men in business creation. Women also operate different types of businesses 
than men. In particular, women-run businesses are less likely to export and to introduce new products and 
services, and are often in personal service sector s, retail, tourism, health care and education (OECD, 
2021c). 
20. Many factors may contribute to the gender gap in entrepreneurship, including institutional barriers, 
such as family and tax policies that discourage labour market participation and entrepreneurship; negative 
social attitudes towards women’s entrepreneurship; market failures; and personal choices (OECD, 2021c). 
Female entrepreneurs face higher barriers to access private finance  compared to male colleagues, with 
the gap being particularly steep for high-potential innovative start-ups (Lassebie et al, 2019). 
Figure 9. Fewer women than men are entrepreneurs 
Percentage of self-employed who are employers in total employment  
 
Source: OECD Gender Data Portal. 
4.  Women tend to be more vulnerable to economic shocks and poverty  
21. Women are often more vulnerable to economic shocks than men, although this depends on the 
type of shock and the sectoral composition of employment (Périvier, 2014). In general, shocks primarily 
affecting industrial sectors tend to hit male employment, whereas shocks to service activities tend to hit 
women disproportionately. The COVID-19 pandemic is a case in point. Although women were at the core 
of the fight against COVID 19, as they account for about th ree quarters and two-thirds of health care and 
education employment respectively, they were also overrepresented in hard -hit industries that rel ied on 
travel and physical interaction. In addition, women tend to engage in involuntary part-time work more often 
than men, mak ing them vulnerable to reductions in working time in period of economic duress (OECD, 
2020d). Women also face increased risks of violence, exploitation, abuse or harassment during times of 
crisis (OECD, 2020a). 

ECO/WKP(2023)29  13 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
22. Women are at higher risk of p overty than men in most countries, especially in Asia and some 
Eastern European countries (Figure 10). This is particularly the case for single mothers, as just under one-
third of single-parent families are income -poor, which is three times higher than the  poverty rate for two -
parent families (Adema et al., 2020), and for older women with low pensions (OECD, 2021a, b). The cost-
of-living crisis is also affecting women disproportionately, as their financial buffers are reduced by the 
gender pay gap, the gender pension gap and more limited possibilities to work because of a higher burden 
of caring for children and other close relatives. Single mothers are particularly at risk of poverty resulting 
from higher energy and food prices. Older women, who generally l ive longer than men and on average 
receive lower pensions, are particularly at risk of energy poverty  and health damage due to insufficient 
heating (European Parliament, 2023). 
Figure 10. Women are at higher risk of poverty than men in most countries 
Gender poverty gap 
 
Note: Difference between the share of women and the share of men living with less than 50% of the median income.  
Source: OECD Income Distribution Database and OECD calculations. 
5.  Policies can support female employment and foster equal opportunities 
23. A wide range of institutional and societal factors contribute to gender -related inequalities. These 
need to be tackled through a wide range of policies, including labour, family, childcare, pension, taxation, 
education, integration and entrepreneurship policies. Making the labour market more gender -inclusive is 
stated as a policy priority for about 20 OECD countries in the latest edition of OECD Going for Growth  
(OECD, 2023c), with expanding access to quality childcare and early education, removing tax and benefits 
disincentives, improving parental leave policies and providing more flexible work arrangements identified 
as the main areas for action (Figure 11). Alongside such policies, mainstreaming gender into all polic y 
fields is necessary to achieve gender equality. 

14  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Figure 11. More gender-inclusive labour markets is a priority for many countries 
Number of OECD countries where given reforms are among top priorities 
 
Source: Economic Policy Reforms 2023: Going for Growth, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
5.1.  Broad and affordable access to childcare and early childhood education is 
crucial   
24. Combining work and child-raising is often challenging. Low quality or unaffordable childcare can 
be a significant hindrance to women’s labour market participation. Adequate childcare supply facilitates an 
earlier return to work after childbirth and provides the option for both parents to take on full -time work 
(OECD, 2022a). Although participation is not compulsory in all OECD countries, school enrolment between 
age 3 and 5 is significantly below 80% in only five countries (Costa Rica, Greece, Switzerland, Türkiye and 
United States). Conversely, on average only slightly over one in three children aged between 0 and 2 years 
participates in early childhood education and care services. The average hides large differences across 
countries, with extremely low enrolment rates in some Eastern European countries and high rates in 
Scandinavia, and across income groups, with lower  participation of children from less affluent families in 
most countries (Figure 12).  
25. High childcare costs can make work financially unattractive, particularly for low-wage earners. On 
average, a parent of two children taking up full -time employment and using centre-based childcare loses 
about half of his/her earnings to either higher taxes or lower benefits. The loss is especially high for low -
income earners and varies widely across countries (Figure 13). The United Kingdom has recently 
announced new poli cies to tackle barriers to parents working ( Box 1).  Beyond facilitating mothers’ 
employment, access to affordable high -quality early childhood education can be decisive for children’s 
development, especially for those from lower socio-economic background (OECD, 2018b). Well-developed 
elderly care can also favour female employment, as women are more likely than men to interrupt their 
careers or work part-time to care for family members (OECD, 2017). 

ECO/WKP(2023)29  15 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Figure 12. Enrolment in early education varies widely across countries and income groups 
Participation rates in early childhood education and care, 0- to 2-year-olds, by equivalised disposable income tertiles 
2020 or latest  
 
Note: OECD estimates based on information from EU -SILC. Data refer to children using centre -based services (e.g. nurseries or day care 
centres and pre-schools, both public and private), organised family day care, and care services provided by (paid) professional childminders,  
regardless of whether or not the service is registered or ISCED -recognised. Equivalised disposable income tertiles are calculated using the 
disposable (post tax and transfer) income of the household in which the child lives , and are based on the equivalised disposable incomes of 
children aged less than or equal to 12. 
Source: OECD Family Database. 
Figure 13. High childcare costs can generate high financial disincentives to enter employment 
Per cent of earnings lost when entering employment and using childcare, 2021 or latest  
 
Note: This indicator meas ures the percentage of earnings lost to either higher taxes or lower benefits when a parent of two children takes up 
full-time employment and uses centre -based childcare. Calculations refer to a couple with two children aged 2 and 3 where the other parent 
works full-time at 67% of the average wage. 
Source: OECD (2023), Financial disincentive to enter employment with childcare costs (indicator, accessed on 13 April 2023). 

16  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Box 1. Addressing barriers to parents working in the United Kingdom  
Although British women are highly educated, their skills are not fully utilised in the labour market and 
inequalities in earnings persist. Women adjust working hours to take over care responsibilities. Parental 
leave pay rates are low, providing little incentive to shift leave to fathers (OECD, 2022d).  
The 2023 spring budget includes ambitious measures to remove barriers to parents working, to be fully 
implemented by September 2025. It substantially increases the amount of free childcare that work ing 
families can access. The government will provide over GBP 4.1 billion by 2027-28 to fund 30 free hours 
per week for working parents with children aged from 9 months to 3 years in England, matching the 
current eligibility for 3 to 4 year-olds.  
The gove rnment is also providing additional funding to childcare providers, to help them provide 
sufficient capacity to deliver the free hours offered, manage cost pressures, and raise the quality of 
provision. Further flexibility in childcare provision will be in troduced, notably by changing staff -to-child 
ratios from one-to-four to one-to-five for 2 years-olds in England and providing start -up grants for new 
child carers. 
New policies will also aim to provide access to care in school from 8am to 6pm, to ensure th at working 
parents are not forced to reduce their hours due to caring responsibilities.  
Support for parents on Universal Credit (means -tested social benefit) who face the highest childcare 
costs will be increased and payments related to childcare costs wi ll be brought forward to alleviate 
liquidity constraints faced by low-income households. 
Source: OECD Economic Surveys: United Kingdom 2022, OECD Publishing, Paris; HM Treasury, Spring Budget 2023, Policy Paper. 
5.2.  Promoting work-life balance for both men and women through parental leave 
arrangements 
26. Promoting work -life balance, which is an essential dimension of well -being, supports gender 
equality by making work more compatible with family care and allowing a better sharing of domestic tasks 
between men a nd women. Potential actions include : incorporating part -time and other time flexibility 
options in career patterns ; ensuring that employees who use workplace flexibilities are not penalised for 
doing so; promoting part-time as a temporary rather than a per manent solution for employees with family 
obligations; and developing policies and transition paths supporting the move from part -time to full -time 
work (OECD, 2015). Although teleworking provides welcome flexibility, it has mixed effects on work -life 
balance inequalities, the gender wage gap, and gender disparities in career progression (Touzet, 2023). 
27. Parental leave, which is still very unevenly split between parents, even where institutional settings 
encourage sharing, tends to slow women’s career progression. While opportunities for young women have 
generally increased in OECD countries, mothers tend to lose ground after having children, sometimes 
even moving into lower quality jobs or exiting the labour market altogether. The “child penalty” associated 
with motherhood, defined as the long-run loss in gross labour earnings excluding taxes and transfers, that 
results from lower employment, hours worked and wage rate s, has been estimated from around 20% in 
Denmark and Sweden to more than 50% in Austria and Germany, with the United Kingdom and the United 
States in between (Kleven et al., 2019). In recent years, policy reforms in many OECD countries have 
aimed to encourage fathers to take up parental leave through earmarked months or bonus systems. The 
number of OECD countries offering some parental leave reserve d for fathers rose from seven in 1995 to 
34 in 2020 (OECD, 2022a). Nevertheless, parental leave entitlements are still very uneven between 
parents in most countries (Figure 14), calling for further progress to encourage a more equal use of parental 
leave. For example, extending parental leave and making it more flexible is part of the broader Australian 
National Strategy for gender equality (Box 2). 
ECO/WKP(2023)29  17 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Figure 14. Parental leave entitlements are still very uneven between parents 
 
Note: Maternity leave refers to the number of weeks of job -protected leave available for mothers just before and after childbirth. For countries 
where there is no separate legislation for maternity leave, the weeks of parental leave reserved for the exclusive use of mothers around childbirth 
are reported. Parental leave with job protection refers to the number of weeks after maternity leave which a woman can take a s parental leave 
with her job protected, disregarding payment conditions. Total duration of paid maternity and parental leave refers to the total number of weeks 
which a women can be on paid leave after the birth of a child combining both maternity, parental and home care leave. Paid father-specific leave 
refers to the number of paid weeks reserved  for the exclusive use of fathers, including entitlements to paid paternity leave, 'father quotas' or 
periods of paid parental leave that can be used only by the father and cannot be transferred to the mother, and any weeks of paid sharable 
leave that must be taken by the father in order for the family to qualify for 'bonus' weeks of parental leave. 
Source: OECD Family Database. 
Box 2. The Australian National Strategy for gender equality 
Improving gender equality is a key objective for the Australian government. A National Strategy to Achieve 
Gender Equality has been articulated that will be partly informed by the newly established Women’s 
Economic Equality Taskforce.  
Some reforms are already underway: 
• The government paid parental leave schemes for mothers and fathers are being combined and the 
total amount of paid parental leave will increase from 20 weeks to 26 weeks by July 2026. In addition, 
increased flexibility is being introduced, with parents able to take leave concurrently and in blocks as 
small as one day at a time. Two weeks of leave will be reserved for each parent as a dedicated “use 
it or lose it” portion. 
• The Child Care Subsidy was increased in the October 2022 Budget. Howeve r, an additional 39 000 
early childhood care workers will be needed by 2023 to meet needs. The government has tasked the 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to undertake a 12-month inquiry into the cost of 
childcare (interim reports were released in June and September 2023 (ACCC, 2023 a, b)) and the 
Productivity Commission to conduct a comprehensive review of the childcare sector (to commence 
in July 2023). 
The government’s Employment White Paper ( Australian Government , 2023), which explo res the policies 
needed for Australia’s future labour market, also put s a strong emphasis on improving women’s economic 
participation and equality. 
Recent changes to industrial relations laws embed the principle of gender equality in the Fair Work 
Commission’s decision-making processes. In addition, various changes have been made to labour market 
regulations to promote gender equity. These include provisions to increase pay transparency, the ability to 
request flexible work arrangements and punishment of em ployers when sexual harassment occurs in 
their workplace. 
Source: OECD (2023d), OECD Economic Surveys: Australia 2023. 

18  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
5.3.  Facilitating the return to work after an extended parental leave through 
training 
28. Mothers often face challenges upon returning from long parental leave. This is especially true in 
times when work practices and tools evolve rapidly. Training, re -skilling and upskilling schemes can help 
women re-engage in their careers and assist them in transitioning to new jobs. Digital skills can be decisive 
in that respect, as hurdles to access, affordability, lack of education and inherent biases and socio-cultural 
norms often curtail women and girls’ ability to benefit from the opportunities offered by the digital 
transformation (OECD, 2018c, 2019). The green transition requires broadening the access of women to 
emerging green-task jobs, notably by encouraging early engagement in science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics, as well as providing c areer guidance, while offering retraining and upskilling 
opportunities to workers in polluting jobs, which are mainly held by men (OECD, 2023b; Causa et al., 
2023). 
5.4.  Supporting gender-balanced career advancements through corporate 
disclosure   
29. Female employment is often held back by a lack of opportunities to access sufficiently rewarding 
and well-paid jobs. As the bulk of the gender wage gap is concentrated within firms, i.e. the same firm pays 
men more than women with similar skills (OECD, 2022a), policies  targeted at firms are key to promoting 
women’s access to better jobs and reducing gender wage gaps. They include pay transparency measures, 
such as disclosure requirements, gender equality audits, job-classification systems, voluntary target setting 
and mandatory quotas for women in higher-level positions or company boards (OECD, 2022a). More than 
half of OECD countries now require private sector firms to systematically report their gender pay gaps. 
Many of the reporting schemes are embedded in extensive equal-pay audit systems. Governments should 
ensure that reporting schemes do not exclude SMEs and workers in precarious work arrangements, 
effectively enforce reporting rules, conduct more frequent and rigorous evaluations of their effects, and 
raise awareness of pay gap reporting rules and results among firms, employees, their representatives and 
the public (OECD, 2023e). 
5.5.  Addressing biases in the tax and pension systems  
30. Wage disadvantages can be compounded by the tax and benefit system. The role of taxatio n of 
second earners, who are often women, in creating work disincentives has long been recognised. Empirical 
evidence points to a strong responsiveness of second earners to these disincentives (OECD, 2011). The 
progressivity of the tax system eases the bur den on part -time workers, among which women are over -
represented. However, when coupled with the removal of tax credits and allowances once a part-time 
worker enters full-time work, progressivity creates disincentives for part -time workers to move to full -time 
work (Harding et al., 2022). Moving from household -based towards individual taxation would help  to 
remove negative work incentives for second earners. Among the OECD countries that responded to the 
OECD Tax & Gender Stocktaking Questionnaire 2021, 18 reported applying individual taxation, five 
household-level taxation and six providing an option between the two (OECD, 2022c). In the same survey, 
countries identified the gender impact of tax credits and allowances, tax system progressivity and social 
security contributions as key areas for future work to improve tax systems and enhance gender equality. 
31. Lower wages and career breaks translate into lower pensions for women. While addressing the 
root causes is key, some adjustments to retirement savings arr angements could ensure that they do not 
compound existing inequalities in women’s retirement benefits and could even help reduce them. In some 
cases, particular features of retirement plans disadvantage women, for instance when eligibility criteria are 
based on working hours or earnings, or when contributions stop during periods of maternity leave, or when 
women do not get their share of retirement benefit entitlements upon divorce (OECD, 2021a).  
ECO/WKP(2023)29  19 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
5.6.  Better integrating foreign-born women through tailored labour-market 
programmes 
32. Effective integration of foreign -born women is crucial to achieve broader equality objectives, 
including the reduction of gender gaps and the successful inclusion of children of migrants. Many women 
come to OECD countries via family migration and have a weak connection to the labour market. They often 
struggle to have foreign qualifications and skills recognised in the host country. Programmes to reach out 
to migrant women, integration courses , and participation of migrant women in traini ng and other active 
labour market policies can enhance economic and social integration (OECD, 2020e). For example, 
initiatives such as the Swedish Establishment Programme  for recently arrived immigrants and the pilot 
project Equal Establishment, which aims to improve job matching for foreign-born women, show that well-
tailored active labour policy measures can have a significant impact on immigrant women’s employment 
(OECD, 2021d, 2023f). 
5.7.  Promoting women’s access to management positions and entrepreneurship 
33. Many countries have put in place policies to increase the proportion of women on company boards 
and management, including quotas, targets and disclosure requirements. For example, quotas are in place 
in Austria, Belgium, Fra nce, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Korea, Netherlands, Norway and 
Portugal. Countries that have initiated quotas or targets for board composition in listed companies have on 
average achieved a greater level of board gender diversity than other countries. However, such measures 
have often led to a small group of women serving on multiple boards or an increase in family -related 
appointments. Moreover, there seems to be no strong link between the share of women on company 
boards and the proportion of women in management positions. This calls for complementary initiatives to 
strengthen the pipeline for leadership positions, such as programmes to strengthen the professional and 
leadership skills of women, and advocacy and awareness-raising initiatives (Denis, 2022). 
34. Policies to support women’s entrepreneurship need to be strengthened. Recent OECD analysis 
suggests that mainstream entrepreneurship policies and programmes are not gender -neutral (OECD, 
2021c). Explicit approaches are therefore needed to ad dress barriers to entrepreneurship that are 
experienced differently by men and women, and to ensure that women have equal access to policy support 
for entrepreneurs. Widely-used policies to enhance gender equality include actions on entrepreneurship 
culture, skills development, access to finance , and the promotion of entrepreneurship networks and 
ecosystems. However, measures supporting women’s entrepreneurship are often insufficient, calling for 
further action on three priorities: introducing overarching policy frameworks for women’s entrepreneurship; 
better adapting women’s entrepreneurship policy interventions to institutional, cultural and social contexts; 
and reinforcing policy evaluation as a foundation for scaling policy initiatives. Creating targeted  financial 
instruments for female entrepreneurs is one concrete action that would support women-owned businesses. 
5.8.  Enhancing women’s financial inclusion  
35. Financial literacy is essential to improve women’s financial empowerment, opportunities, and well-
being. In many countries, women have less financial knowledge than men, are less confident in their 
financial knowledge and skills, and enjoy lower access to formal financial products (Lusardi and Mitchell, 
2008; Maravalle and González Pandiella, 2022). They ar e more likely to experience difficulties in making 
ends meet, saving, and choosing financial products (OECD, 2013a,  b). Gender differences are driven by 
several potentially interrelated factors, including differences in socio-economic conditions, skills, attitudes, 
and opportunities (Hung et al., 2012). Policies to enhance women’s financial literacy generally target sub -
groups, such as low -income women or micro and small entrepreneurs , and aim at improving women’s 
financial inclusion and use of formal savin g products, preventing over -indebtedness, helping women 
planning for retirement , and supporting female entrepreneurship. Programmes need to be tailored 
according to the specific needs of women and girls with respect to their financial knowledge, confidence  
20  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
and financial strategies, with a particular focus on their ability to make ends meet, save, choose and use 
financial products, and seek information and advice. They need to involve all stakeholders and the results 
should be systematically monitored and ev aluated (OECD, 2013b). It is also necessary to ensure that 
women are not unduly denied access to credit or charged higher interest rates than men for the same risk 
level. Evidence from the US mortgage market points to better performance of loans to women, compared 
to men with similar credit profiles, which are not reflected in pricing and acceptance rates (Goodman et al., 
2016). 
5.9.  Mainstreaming gender across policies 
36. The multiple dimensions and root causes of gender inequality underscore the benefits of 
mainstreaming gender across policy domains. Gender mainstreaming can involve the introduction of laws 
or requirements for public servants to promote gender equality. Between 2017 and 2022, nine OECD 
countries  introduced new legislation or regulation underpinni ng gender mainstreaming in at least one 
policy area. Strategic planning, as reflected in documents, formal government commitments and dedicated 
programmes, is another powerful avenue for gender mainstreaming. Countries such as Austria, Denmark, 
Iceland, Lithuania, Luxembourg and the Netherlands have introduced requirements to advance gender 
equality priorities in government programmes. Gender budgeting, which is now used in over 60% of OECD 
countries, is also a powerful tool to guide gender equality policie s (OECD, 2023g). The OECD has 
developed a comprehensive Toolkit on Mainstreaming and Implementing Gender Equality, designed to 
help policymakers identify weaknesses and opportunities in their country and work contexts, and highlight 
approaches available to advance gender equality (OECD, 2015). 
37. Gender-disaggregated data are key to raising awareness of gender issues and designing 
adequate, evidence -based policies to fight inequality. For example, gaps have been identified in data 
needed to assess the gender i mpact of taxation (OECD, 2022c). The sources of gender wage gaps are 
often difficult to assess. Detailed and timely information, such as that provided by the Swedish National 
Mediation Office annual report, which separat es differences related to age, education, occupation, sector 
of employment and hours worked from gender discrimination, can facilitat e corrective action (Swedish 
National Mediation Office, 2021). Such examples illustrate the benefits of expanding gender -related data 
collection and dissemination. Civil society organisations, including NGOs and women’s groups, can help 
to gather information about the potential or actual impact of government policies, and should be consulted 
regularly. Surveys, interviews, reviews, opinion polls, focus group discussions and benchmarking are also 
effective methods for obtaining and analysing data on diversity policies. Actions to be considered include 
ensuring wide access to gender -disaggregated data at national and sub -national level s, using public 
consultations to collect missing information, and enhancing public officials and statisticians’ awareness of 
gender issues through information campaigns and trainings (OECD, 2015).  
ECO/WKP(2023)29  21 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
References 
Adema, W., Clarke, C., Thévenon, O. (2020), “Family Policies and Family Outcom es in OECD 
Countries”, In: Nieuwenhuis, R. and W. Van Lancker (eds), The Palgrave Handbook of Family Policy, 
Palgrave Macmillan, Cham. 
ACCC (2023a), Childcare inquiry 2023 , June 2023 interim report , Australian Competition and Consumer 
Commission, Canberra. 
ACCC (2023b), Childcare inquiry 2023, September 2023 interim report , Australian Competition and 
Consumer Commission, Canberra. 
Australian Government (2023), Working Future: The Australian Government’s White Paper on Jobs and 
Opportunities, Canberra. 
Bettio, F. and A. Verashchagina (2009), Gender Segregation in the Labour Market, Root Causes, 
Implications and Policy Responses in the EU, European Commission, Directorate -General for 
Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities. 
Brussino, O. and J. McBrien (2022), “Gender stereotypes in education: Policies and practices to address 
gender stereotyping across OECD education systems”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 271, 
OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Carlana, M. (2019), “Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers’ Gender Bias”, The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 134(3), 1163-1224.  
Causa, O. et al. (2023), “Lost in the green transition? From measurement to stylized facts”, OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers, OECD Publishing, Paris, forthcoming.  
Causa, O., N. Luu and M. Abendschein (2021), "Labour market transitions across OECD countries: 
Stylised facts", OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1692, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Causa, O. and Å. Johansson (2010), "Intergenerational Social Mobility in OECD Countries", OECD 
Journal: Economic Studies, vol. 2010/1. 
Cavalcanti, T. and J. Tavares (2016), “The Output Cost of Gender Discrimination: A Model -Based 
Macroeconomics Estimate, The Economic Journal, 126, 109-134. 
Charlton, E. (2023), “This is why women are bearing the brunt of the cost of living crisis, according to 
research”, World Economic Forum. 
Ciminelli, G., C. Schwellnus and B. Stadler (2021), “Sticky floors or glass ceilings? The role of human 
capital, working time flexibility and discrimination in the gender wage gap”, OECD Economics 
Department Working Papers, No. 1668, OECD Publishing, Paris,  
Criscuolo, C, P Gal, T Leidecker and G Nicoletti (2021), "The human side of productivity: Uncovering the 
role of skills and diversity for firm productivity", OECD Productivity Working Papers No. 29, OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 
Cuberes, D., and M. Teignier (2016). “Aggregate Effects of Gender Gaps in the Labor Market: A 
Quantitative Estimate”. Journal of Human Capital, 10(1), 1-32.  
Curtis, M., C. Schmid and M. Struber (2012), “Gender diversity and corporate performance”, Credit 
Suisse Research Institute, Zurich. 
22  ECO/WKP(2023)29 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
Denis, E. (2022), “Enhancing gender diversity on boards and in senior management of listed companies”, 
OECD Corporate Governance Working Papers, No. 28, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Duflo, E. (2012), “Women empowerment and economic development”, Journal of Economic Literature, 
50(4), 1051-79. 
Encinas-Martín, M. and M. Cherian (2023), Gender, Education and Skills: The Pers istence of Gender 
Gaps in Education and Skills, OECD Skills Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
European Parliament (2023), “Gender aspects of energy poverty”. 
Galinsky, A. et al. (2015), “Maximizing the gains and minimizing the pains of diversity: a policy 
perspective”, Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(6). 
Goodman, L., J. Zhu and B. Bai (2016), “Women Are Better than Men at Paying Their Mortgages”, Urban 
Institute Research Report, Washington, DC. 
Harding, M., D. Paturot and H. Simon (2022), "Taxation of part-time work in the OECD", OECD Taxation 
Working Papers, No. 57, OECD Publishing, Paris.   
HM Treasury (2023), Spring Budget 2023, Policy Paper, London. 
Hung, A., J. Yoong and E. Brown (2012), "Empowering Women Through Financial Awareness and 
Education", OECD Working Papers on Finance, Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 14, OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 
Kleven, H., C. Landais, J. Posch, A. Steinhauer and J. Zweimüller (2019), “Child Penalties across 
Countries: Evidence and Explanations”, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109, 122-26. 
Lassébie, J., et al. (2019), “Levelling the playing field: Dissecting the gender gap in the funding of start -
ups”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 73, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Levanon, A., P. England and P. Allison (2009), “Occupational feminization and pay: assessing causal 
dynamics using 1950-2000 U.S. Census data”, Social Forces, 88(2), 865-892. 
Lusardi, A. and O.S. Mitchell (2008), “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do Women Fare?”, American 
Economic Review, 98 (2), 413-17. 
Maravalle, A. and A. González Pandiella (2022), “Expanding access to finance to boost growth and 
reduce inequalities in Mexico”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1717, OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 
Noland, M., T. Moran and B. Kotschwar (2016), “Is gender diversity profitable? Evidence from a global 
survey”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper Series, No. 16 -3, Washington 
DC. 
OECD (2023a), Joining Forces for Gender Equality: What is Holding us Back?, OECD  Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2023b), Job Creation and Local Economic Development 2023: Bridging the Great Green Divide, 
OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2023c), Economic Policy Reforms 2023: Going for Growth, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2023d), OECD Economic Surveys: Australia 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2023e), Reporting Gender Pay Gaps in OECD Countries, Guidance for Pay Transparency 
Implementation, Monitoring and Reform, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2023f), OECD Economic Surveys: Sweden 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2023g), “OECD Best Practices for Gender Budgeting”, OECD Journal on Budgeting, Vol. 23/1. 
OECD (2022a), “Same skills, different pay: Tackling Gender Inequalities at firm level”, OECD, Paris.  
OECD (2022b), Education at a Glance 2022: OECD Indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2022c), Tax Policy and Gender Equality: A Stocktake of Country Approaches, OECD Publishing, 
Paris. 
OECD (2022d), OECD Economic Surveys: United Kingdom 2022, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
ECO/WKP(2023)29  23 
PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY TO STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RESILIENCE 
Unclassified 
OECD (2021a), Towards Improved Retirement Savings Outcomes for Women, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2021b), Pensions at a Glance 2021: OECD and G20 Indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2021c), Entrepreneurship Policies through a Gender Lens, OECD Studies on SMEs and  
Entrepreneurship, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2021d), OECD Economic Surveys: Sweden 2021, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2020a), “Women at the core of the fight against COVID-19 crisis”, OECD Policy Responses to 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), OECD, Paris. 
OECD (2020b), OECD Employment Outlook 2020: Worker Security and the COVID -19 Crisis, OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2020c), How's Life? 2020: Measuring Well-being, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
OECD (2020d), “Distributional risks associated with non-standard work: Stylised facts and policy 
considerations”, Tackling Coronavirus Series, OECD, Paris. 
OECD (2020e), “How to strengthen the integration of migrant women?”, Migration Policy Debates, N°25, 
OECD, Paris. 
OECD (2019), The Role of Education and Skills in Bridging the Digital Gender Divide, Evidence from 
APEC Economies, OECD, Paris. 
OECD (2018a), A Broken Social Elevator? How to Promote Social Mobility, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2018b), Early Learning Matters, OECD, Paris.  
OECD (2018c), Bridging the Digital Gender Divide, Include, Upskill, Innovate, OECD, Paris. 
OECD (2017), The Pursuit of Gender Equality: An Uphill Battle, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2015), OECD Toolkit for Mainstreaming and Implementing Gender Equality, Implementing the 
2015 OECD Recommendation on Gender Equality in Public Life, OECD, Paris.  
OECD (2013a), Women and Financial Education: Evidence, Policy Responses and Guidance, OECD 
Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2013b), Addressing women’s needs for financial education, International Network on Financial 
Education (INFE), OECD, Paris. 
OECD (2011), Taxation and Employment, OECD Tax Policy Studies, No. 21, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
Périvier, H. (2014), “Men and women during the economic crisis. Employment trends in eight European 
countries”, Revue de l'OFCE, 133(2), 41-84. 
Stevenson, B. (2021), “Women, work, and families: recovering from the pandemic -induced recession”, 
Economic analysis, Hamilton Project, Washington DC. 
Swedish National Mediation Office (2021), Wage Differences Between Women and Men 2020,  
Stockholm. 
Touzet, C. (2023), "Teleworking through the gender looking glass: Facts and gaps", OECD Social, 
Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 285, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Woolley, A. et al. (2010), “Evidence for a collective intelligence factor in the performance of human 
groups”, Science, Vol. 330(6004). 