    
Raising ambition 
and accelerating 
delivery of  
climate finance
Third report of  
the Independent  
High-Level Expert Group  
on Climate Finance
November 2024
2 
 
Preface and acknowledgements 
The Independent High Level Expert Group (IHLEG) on Climate Finance has been supporting the 
deliberations on the climate finance agenda under successive COP Presidencies since COP26. The 
group is co-chaired by Amar Bhattacharya, Vera Songwe and Nicholas Stern. Eléonore Soubeyran 
serves as the Secretariat. The full membership is provided at the end of the report. This independent 
group was tasked to help develop and put forward policy options and recommendations to 
encourage and enable the public and private investment and finance necessary for delivery of the 
commitments, ambition, initiatives and targets of the UNFCCC Paris Agreement, reinforced by the 
Glasgow Climate Pact, the Sharm el-Sheikh agenda, and the COP28 Global Climate Finance 
Framework. 
This third report of the IHLEG has benefited enormously from the active and high-quality 
participation, guidance and input of the group’s members, and from feedback from a wide range 
of stakeholders. The views expressed are the responsibility of Amar Bhattacharya, Vera Songwe, 
Eléonore Soubeyran and Nicholas Stern, and are not necessarily those of individual members, nor 
does the report claim to represent the views of the COP29 Presidencies or the Climate Champions.  
The writing team was led by Amar Bhattacharya with Eléonore Soubeyran, with the guidance of 
Vera Songwe and Nicholas Stern. The following people led on different sections: Amar Bhattacharya 
(investment, financing pathways, multilateral development banks, country-led investments); 
Eléonore Soubeyran (investment, climate finance landscape); Swati Ghosh (cost of capital); Homi 
Kharas and Charlotte Rivard (debt); Katherine Stodulka, Mattia Romani and Zoe Greindl (private 
finance); Marilou Uy (debt, domestic resource mobilisation, concessional climate finance, carbon 
markets); Camilla Born, Annabel Mahgerefteh, Talia Smith, Harris Rahman, Jesse Hoffman 
(tracking and monitoring). Georgina Kyriacou edited the report. 
The authors would like to thank the participants at two roundtables that were co-hosted with the 
UN Climate Change Executive Secretary on taking stock and setting the climate finance action 
agenda and deliverables. They also thank participants at two roundtables held with the private 
sector in New York and Washington in autumn 2024, co-hosted by GFANZ and the Blended Finance 
Taskforce. Special thanks go to Baysa Naran and Dharshan Wignarajah at the Climate Policy 
Initiative, Cecilia Tam, Lucila Arboleya Sarazola and Paul Grimal at the International Energy Agency, 
and Paul Watkiss, Nella Canales and Dipesh Chapagain at the UN Environment Programme. 
The estimates of investment needs for adaptation and resilience in 2030 for China and other 
emerging markets and developing countries were provided by the Finance chapter team of the 
UNEP Adaptation Gap Report (Nella Canales, Dipesh Chapagain and Paul Watkiss), based on 2024 
analysis using data from updated 2022 analysis of modelled costs, finance needs and international 
public adaptation finance flows. The data were produced with co-financing from: the 
ECONOGENESIS project funded by UK aid from the UK government and by the International 
Development Research Centre, Canada as part of the Climate Adaptation and Resilience (CLARE) 
research programme; the Assessing Climate Change Risk in Europe project (ACCREU), funded by 
the EU through the Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Action and UK Research and 
Innovation under the UK Government’s Horizon Europe guarantee; and core funding to the 
Stockholm Environment Institute from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.  
The work of the IHLEG is supported by the Brookings Institution, and the Grantham Research 
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics and Political 
Science. Both institutions would like to acknowledge support for this work and associated 
engagement from the UK Department for Energy Security and Net Zero. Brookings acknowledges 
support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Open Society Foundation; the Grantham 
Research Institute acknowledges its funders including the Grantham Foundation for the Protection 
of the Environment and Quadrature Climate Foundation. Support for the IHLEG/Systemiq Tracking 
and Monitoring Framework was provided by the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF). 
The views in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of any of the funding or 
host institutions. Any errors and omissions remain the authors’ own.  
Citation: Bhattacharya A, Songwe V, Soubeyran E and Stern N (2024) Raising Ambition and Accelerating 
Delivery of Climate Finance. London: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, 
London School of Economics and Political Science. © The authors, 2024  
3 
 
Contents 
Executive summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
1. Investment imperative and opportunities ................................ ................................ .. 11 
1.1. Understanding the investment needs for climate action ........................................ 11 
1.2. Uneven gains for rapid cost reductions in clean technology .................................. 18 
1.3. Unlocking savings and generating employment and economic   
       growth opportunities ......................................................................................... 18 
2. Financing pathways to achieve the Paris Agreement goals ................................ ........ 22 
2.1. Where are we on climate finance? ...................................................................... 22 
2.2. Pathways to scaling up climate finance in EMDCs other than China to 2030       
       and beyond ....................................................................................................... 23 
3. Accelerating delivery of the action agenda on climate finance ................................ .. 27 
3.1. Key stakeholders in delivering the climate finance agenda .................................... 27 
3.2. Unlocking climate investment at scale ................................................................ 28 
3.3. Managing debt and fiscal space .........................................................................29  
3.4. The imperative to boost domestic resource mobilisation ...................................... 31 
3.5. Creating a new highway for private finance and tackling the cost of capital ......... 32 
3.6. An MDB system that works for climate action .................................................... 36 
3.7. Tapping the potential of carbon markets ........................................................... 38 
3.8. Delivering and expanding options for concessional finance.................................. 39 
4. Tracking and monitoring the delivery of the action agenda ................................ ....... 43 
References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 44 
IHLEG membership ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 49 
 
  
4 
 
Executive summary 
Investment imperative and opportunity 
The world faces an unprecedented investment imperative and opportunity. The 
transition to clean, low-carbon energy, building resilience to the impacts of climate 
change, and protecting nature and biodiversity, require a rapid step-up in investment in all 
countries. 
The needs and opportunities are especially significant in emerging markets and 
developing countries (EMDCs) other than China: they are the countries that will account 
for the largest share of the increase in investments needed for a global energy transition, 
they are the most vulnerable to climate impacts, and they are home to the vast 
preponderance of the world’s nature and biodiversity resources.  
We estimate that the global projected investment requirement for climate action is 
around $6.3–6.7 trillion per year by 2030, of which $2.7–2.8 trillion is in advanced 
economies, $1.3-$1.4 trillion in China, and $2.3–2.5 trillion in EMDCs other than China.1 
These latter countries will account for almost 45% of the average incremental investment 
needs from now to 2030 but they have been falling behind, especially Sub-Saharan Africa. 
For 2035, we estimate global investment requirements for climate action to be around $7–
8.1 trillion per year, with advanced economies needing $2.6–3.1 trillion, China $1.3–1.5 
trillion, and EMDCs other than China requiring $3.1–3.5 trillion. These needs are our 
estimations of what is required for delivery on the Paris Agreement, and the investments 
will also make a vital contribution to sustainable growth and the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
Rapidly falling technology costs especially for solar power, and the huge expansion in 
supply, notably from China, represent an unprecedented opportunity for developing 
countries. Africa, for example, accounts for about 60% of the world’s best solar resources, 
but received less than 2% of the investment in clean energy in 2023. 
Ramping up climate investments in EMDCs is the only way to reach the Paris 
Agreement goals of limiting the global temperature increase to well below 2 degrees 
Celsius and adapting to climate change, and arrest the accelerating threat to nature 
and biodiversity. Doing so also represents a huge growth and development opportunity 
following the investment slowdown in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
Our updated analysis indicates that of the projected investment needs of around $2.4 
trillion per year in 2030 for EMDCs other than China, around $1.6 trillion is for the 
clean energy transition, $0.25 trillion for adaptation and resilience, $0.25 trillion for 
loss and damage, $0.3 trillion for natural capital and sustainable agriculture, and 
$0.04 trillion for fostering a just transition. To emphasise, these are the investment 
levels that are necessary for delivery on the Paris targets. They are analytical deductions in 
relation to our estimates of what is needed, not a ‘first bid’ in a negotiation. 
Any shortfall in investment before 2030 will place added pressure on the years that 
follow, creating a steeper and potentially more costly path to climate stability. The 
less the world achieves now, the more we will need to invest later. Delayed action means 
we will need to mobilise even larger sums in shorter timeframes to catch up on critical 
targets. Additionally, investment needs for adaptation and resilience, as well as loss and 
damage and restoration of nature, will rise sharply as climate and nature risks escalate. 
 
1 All figures are in US dollars. Numbers may not sum to totals due to rounding. 
5 
 
This ramp-up of investment can unlock the growth story of the 21st century and yield 
huge avoided costs and co-benefits (versus the costs of inaction) while generating 
very large savings. The avoided costs (such as adverse impacts on productivity and 
health, damages to assets, and loss of biodiversity) and co-benefits of climate action 
(such as increased productivity, improved ecosystem services and strengthened social 
stability) could amount to about 15–18% of global GDP in 2030. In addition, financial 
savings from a shift to a low-carbon economy could be as much as 11–18% of global GDP 
(coming, for example, from reduced investments, consumption and imports of fossil fuels, 
and fewer environmentally harmful subsidies). These benefits and savings will depend on 
the pace of the transition and accrue over time. The challenge, therefore, is to foster the 
enabling conditions for the ramp-up of investments and mobilise finance of the right 
scale, of the right kind and at an affordable cost. 
Criticality and structure of finance 
Mobilising the necessary financing for EMDCs other than China  
($ billion per year by 2030, increment from current in parentheses) 
 
Notes: *Includes household savings. **A significant proportion of this private finance would be directly and indirectly 
catalysed by MDBs, other development finance institutions and bilateral finance. ***Includes multilateral climate funds.  
The large and rapid scale-up of finance to support a big investment push can only be 
achieved by harnessing all pools of finance. For each strand, it is important to pursue 
ambitious targets consistent with the investment goals but based on credible pathways to 
delivery. The approach must utilise the comparative strengths of each strand in financing 
the different types of investment. And it will be important to tap the synergies from the 
different strands of finance to enhance leveraging power and bring down risks and the 
cost of capital.   
Domestic resources, which currently account for around 70% of climate finance, can 
reasonably finance $1.4 trillion per year of the total investment need of $2.4 trillion by 
2030 and $1.9 trillion of the total investment need of $3.2 trillion by 2035. The role of 
the private sector will be much more important than in the past, given the changing 
nature of investment.   
External finance from all sources, international public and private along with others, 
will need to cover $1 trillion per year of the total investment need by 2030 and around 
$1.3 trillion by 2035. We argue that cross-border private finance can meet about half of 

6 
 
these needs given the changing nature of investment opportunities. This would imply a 15- 
to 18-fold increase on current levels. Given their important direct and catalytic role, the 
IHLEG and the G20-mandated Independent Expert Group (IEG) on multilateral 
development bank (MDB) reform have argued that financing from MDBs needs to triple by 
2030. Bilateral climate finance from advanced economies, which currently amounts to $43 
billion per year, needs to double or more, given the central role that it plays in building 
trust and financing the most difficult needs. 
Building a climate finance system that meets the test of both scale and quality 
requires shifting beyond a traditional focus on mobilising funding to prioritising 
impact and systemic change. This means scaling up climate finance to be accessible, 
predictable, affordable and transparent, rooted in justice and inclusion. Resources must be 
distributed equitably, historical responsibilities acknowledged, and marginalised 
communities included in decisions. Increased attention to gender equality is crucial for 
climate finance that effectively addresses the differing constraints and opportunities for 
men and women. Agreement and implementation of Article 2.1(c) of the Paris Agreement 
can greatly bolster the effectiveness of the climate finance system. 
Different sorts of investment need different sources of finance and thus the 
composition of the different sources of the $1 trillion per year in external finance by 
2030 is of great importance, and so too is the cost of capital. For example, private 
finance will be the main source of investment in infrastructure for renewable energy 
generation. Thus the $1 trillion in external finance for EMDCs other than China is much 
broader in scope than the commitment by developed countries at COP16 in 2010 to 
mobilise $100 billion per year by 2020 for developing countries. The figures presented in this 
report imply a more than fourfold increase in total climate finance and a more than sixfold 
increase in external finance by 2030. 
Non-traditional financing sources can play an important role in closing the financing 
gap.  There is tremendous potential for expanding South–South cooperation between 
EMDCs on climate finance. Non-conventional sources of concessional finance will also 
need to be pursued, including voluntary carbon markets, use of special drawing rights 
(SDRs), solidarity levies on internationally-polluting activities, other international taxes, 
debt swaps and private philanthropy. This could raise around $150 billion in additional 
revenues by 2030. 
A fit-for-purpose climate finance agenda has important implications for the New 
Collective Quantified Goal on Climate Finance (NCQG). Agreement on the NCQG is a 
matter for the Parties. With its overall external finance of $1 trillion per year to EMDCs 
other than China by 2030, and its basic elements of private, MDB, bilateral and other 
concessional flows, this framework provides the key conceptual and practical set 
of numbers for climate finance, and can inform discussions about the NCQG. These 
numbers come from a transparent and deductive analysis of the finance required for the 
investments that will be necessary for delivery on the crucial temperature and climate-
resilience targets of the Paris Agreement. Without these investments in EMDCs other than 
China, the world will fail to achieve those goals. To deliver on the $1 trillion of external 
finance, ambitious but credible targets will be required for the different strands, 
recognising the need for synergies and leverage to achieve scale and effectiveness. The 
tripling of MDB finance, for example, is crucial to scaling up private finance and reducing 
the cost of capital. This framework and the key elements within it should be the main 
focus of the NCQG. 
Within this larger framework, advanced economies need to demonstrate a credible 
commitment, including through the NCQG, to provide and mobilise the finance 
needed for climate action in developing countries. This would entail a tripling of the 
7 
 
$100 billion annual commitment made at COP16 for 2020, and reaffirmed and extended to 
2025 at COP21 in 2015. Other stakeholders also need to come forward with ambitious 
commitments, including the MDBs, the private sector, and developing countries that are in 
a position to provide support. Indeed, cooperation between developing countries (‘South–
South cooperation’) is already making a significant contribution and there is great scope 
for enhanced support and financing from leading developing countries. 
Accelerating the delivery of the climate finance action agenda 
Momentum has been building on the climate finance agenda since COP26. COP26, 
COP27 and COP28 all made climate finance a central priority. The Global Climate 
Finance Framework launched by the UAE COP28 Presidency in 2023 and supported by the 
IHLEG set out an action agenda to deliver on adequate, accessible and affordable climate 
finance that has been endorsed by an important coalition of world leaders. COP29 and 
COP30 will be crucial in taking forward this climate finance agenda, with a need to agree 
on the NCQG, launch a new round of ambitious nationally determined contributions 
(NDCs) in 2025, and accelerate the implementation of the agenda set out in the Global 
Climate Finance Framework. 
Climate finance now features prominently in all key international discussions, 
including the UN, the G20, the international finance institutions (IFIs) and the private 
sector. The Brazilian G20 Presidency launched a special initiative this year, TF-Clima, to 
bring together different stakeholders and build support for an action agenda on climate. 
The Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), which has enlarged to 141 
members comprising central banks and regulators, and the Coalition of Finance Ministers 
for Climate Action, which now comprises finance ministries from 95 countries, have 
become important networks to build consensus and ambition on the climate action 
agenda. Several other coalitions have also emerged to identify and pursue priorities for 
action, including the Bridgetown Initiative (with Bridgetown 3.0 launched in September 
2024), the Paris Pact for People and the Planet (4P, with a permanent secretariat now 
established at the OECD), the Nairobi Declaration of the Africa Climate Summit, and the 
V20 with its action agenda.  
COP29 in Baku and the G20 Summit in Rio de Janeiro provide an opportune moment to 
take stock of the climate finance agenda, deliver an ambitious NCQG, and identify 
priority actions for ramping up progress. In 2025, the Financing for Development 
conference in June, the G20 agenda under the South African Presidency, and COP30 with 
its priority goal of a new round of ambitious NDCs must all enable a big push on the 
necessary investment and its financing.  
A big push is required on three priorities: (i) to prepare and implement high-quality 
investments; (ii) to put in place the necessary macroeconomic and sectoral policy and 
institutional reforms and tackle the severe constraints facing many countries due to high 
debt and limited fiscal space; and (iii) to mobilise finance at scale and improve access to 
affordable capital. These priorities were confirmed at two roundtables convened by the UN 
Climate Change Executive Secretary in partnership with the IHLEG in 2024, in Bonn and 
New York, to take stock of and impart momentum to the climate finance action agenda.  
The starting point is unlocking climate investment at scale. First, countries must set out 
well-articulated strategies and transition plans to provide a clear source of direction, 
including to the private sector. Second, countries must put in place and strengthen 
institutional structures for translating strategies into tangible investment programmes and 
project pipelines. Third, countries need to pursue sustained policy and institutional reforms 
to tackle barriers to investment and incentivise the shift to low-carbon climate-resilient 
development. Country platforms, led and owned by countries with the involvement of all 
8 
 
stakeholders including development finance institutions (DFIs) and the private sector, can 
create the basis for more purposeful and accelerated action to unlock investments and 
mobilise the financing that is needed. Encouragingly, there is growing momentum behind 
the adoption and implementation of country platforms. This whole agenda will require 
stronger and better coordinated efforts to build capacity across all levels of institutions. 
Elevated debt and debt servicing burdens, and limited fiscal space, require urgent 
action. Concerted and innovative approaches are needed, tailored to country 
circumstances, including faster and better implementation of the Common Framework for 
Debt Treatments and use of debt swaps where there is scope. Improved access to low-cost 
finance and improving the terms of existing debt will be key. It is also essential to tackle 
the vicious cycle between climate and debt vulnerability, particularly in low-income and 
highly climate-vulnerable middle-income countries. Finally, Debt Sustainability 
Assessments will need to consider how climate affects financial risks but also how to 
incorporate the long-term growth and sustainability payoffs from climate action.  
An integrated approach to climate finance is needed. While a very large proportion of 
climate finance will be from the private sector, public domestic resource mobilisation will 
be foundational. Increasing tax revenues must be the central pillar of domestic resource 
mobilisation, and there is major scope to raise tax revenues in many EMDCs. Carbon 
pricing provides tremendous potential to raise revenues during the transition while 
efficiently providing incentives to reduce carbon emissions, as does the elimination of fossil 
fuel and other damaging subsidies. All of these efforts to boost public domestic resources 
will require strong international cooperation that ensures that developing countries get an 
equitable share of tax revenues and are supported in enhancing their tax collection 
capacities. 
Despite growing momentum, volumes of private capital flowing to EMDCs are still far 
too low: the challenge is to increase speed as well as scale. To meet this challenge, first, 
the public and private sectors need to strengthen collaboration to develop sectoral 
investment plans and co-create project pipelines. Second, scaling up and replicating more 
effective risk-sharing mechanisms and credit enhancement can help improve the 
availability and reduce the cost of capital in EMDCs. The cost of capital is significantly 
higher in EMDCs than in advanced economies and is a significant impediment, especially 
for clean energy projects. Reducing the cost of capital will require a combination of 
measures at the international and country levels to reduce both actual and perceived risks. 
Revamping the financial system can help create a virtuous cycle for private capital 
mobilisation in EMDCs. Concerted efforts are needed to strengthen the domestic 
financial sector in many EMDCs, including capital markets. Tackling supply-side regulatory 
and incentive barriers to remove legal and organisational constraints to investing in 
EMDCs, especially for clean energy and green industrialisation, is a priority task to unlock 
institutional capital for EMDCs. 
MDBs have embarked on a coordinated programme of reform to implement the 
agenda of ‘better, bigger and more effective MDBs’. While all MDBs have made progress 
on the reform agenda, the pace and ambition fall short of what is needed. From the 
perspective of climate action, there are three areas where progress is not yet sufficient to 
produce transformative change: systematic engagement on system reforms and scaling 
up investment at the country level, including through more proactive engagement in 
country platforms; expanding lending capacity; and catalysing private finance, including 
through tapping long-term institutional capital. MDBs must work with host countries and 
the private sector to reduce and manage risk and bring down the cost of capital. MDBs 
should come forward with a commitment and plan to triple lending capacity by 2030 as 
part of the NCQG, with each MDB doing its part, which will require shared commitment 
9 
 
and leadership from shareholders. Beyond MDBs, an integrated global network of public 
development banks through the Finance in Common initiative could act as a powerful 
force for more coherent and effective support for climate action and finance. 
While bilateral contributions from developed countries are a small component of total 
climate financing, they are critical to building trust, meeting some of the more 
difficult needs, and leveraging other sources of finance. Securing an ambitious IDA21 
(the forthcoming 21st replenishment process of the International Development 
Association) will be vital to supporting climate action in low-income and climate-
vulnerable countries. Multilateral climate funds play an important catalytic role in 
advancing systemic change through partnerships with MDBs, mobilising financing aligned 
with the Paris Agreement, and building markets. There is an urgent need to secure 
adequate funding for the Loss and Damage Fund. 
The voluntary carbon market (VCM) also has the potential to generate much-needed 
revenues for priority elements of the transition in EMDCs. The VCM has suffered from 
major setbacks and poor market sentiment. There are important efforts to provide greater 
assurance of credit integrity. Parties reached consensus at COP29 on the standards for 
Article 6.4 of the Paris Agreement, which can generate new momentum. Further steps 
being undertaken include creating clearer operational guidelines for the use of carbon 
credit regulations that support high quality carbon credits and boost voluntary demand; 
and enabling EMDCs to develop and manage their use of carbon markets. Developing a 
programmatic approach beyond project-by-project is important for integration into 
development finance and action. 
Given the very large needs for concessional finance, non-conventional sources must 
be actively pursued. The G20 and the IMF should explore how to tap the substantial 
potential for voluntary rechannelling from the existing pool of SDRs and modernise the 
framework to make it less rigid and costly. The IMF and the G20 should also initiate 
discussions on the next cycle of SDR issuance as part of a system of regular issuance. There 
is scope for private philanthropy to further augment the scale of its financing and leverage 
its strengths to deliver much-needed grant financing with flexibility and agility. 
These efforts, however, are unlikely to be sufficient to fill the concessional financing 
gap, and innovative solutions need to be pursued actively. One such solution is 
international taxation of high-emitting sectors, which has the potential to raise significant 
amounts of revenue that could be used to fill the climate financing gap. At COP28, the 
Global Solidarity Levies Task Force was launched to explore new avenues for international 
taxation to finance climate action and sustainable development, including the taxation of 
international shipping, aviation, fossil-fuel levies and a financial transactions tax. It will be 
important to broaden the coalition of countries and build consensus on proposals that can 
attract support by COP30. 
Tracking and monitoring the delivery of the climate action agenda 
As the climate finance agenda shifts from outlining the need and pathways for 
climate finance into delivery, tracking and monitoring systems are critical to 
accelerating implementation of the climate finance agenda. Tracking and monitoring 
foster accountability both by shining a spotlight where progress is being made and by 
highlighting gaps and opportunities to aid prioritisation of future actions. 
There is now a reasonably comprehensive structure for tracking climate finance flows, 
including the UNFCCC’s biennial assessment of flows, the OECD’s tracking of the delivery 
of the $100 billion commitment, and Climate Policy Initiative’s (CPI’s) Global Landscape on 
Climate Finance. MDBs also issue an annual joint report on their delivery of climate 
10 
 
finance. However, tracking continues to suffer from a lack of a full consensus on what 
constitutes climate finance and robust data and systematic measurement mechanisms 
for tracking the action agenda on climate finance have also been scarce. Here, an 
important new initiative is CPI’s Climate Finance Reform Compass, which assesses 
implementation against milestones. 
The IHLEG has prepared two complementary instruments to support improved 
monitoring in partnership with CPI: a summary of the action agenda priorities, actions 
and deliverables leading up to COP30 and a State of Delivery report that provides  
a more rigorous assessment of progress against a composite set of indicators. 
  
11 
 
1. Investment imperative and opportunities 
The world faces an unprecedented investment imperative as the window for 
meaningful action on climate change narrows rapidly. To meet the Paris Agreement 
goals, have a chance of mitigating the worst impacts of climate change, build resilience 
and protect nature and biodiversity, transformative investments are essential, particularly 
in emerging markets and developing countries (EMDCs). Rapidly falling technology costs 
and the huge expansion of renewables supply, notably from China, are reducing overall 
investment needs for clean energy – but solutions must be found, too, to address the gaps 
in funding for adaptation and resilience, loss and damage, natural capital and the just 
transition. The ramp-up of investment can also yield huge avoided costs and co-benefits 
while generating very large savings – returns that far outweigh the investment 
requirements and present significant opportunities.  
In this third report of the IHLEG on Climate Finance we update the estimates of 
investment requirements for climate action and set out the action agenda to deliver 
the necessary finance for investment in EMDCs other than China.  
This chapter provides an overview of the investment needs across key areas, from 
clean energy to just transition, and describes the enduring value of investing in climate 
action: to drive economic resilience and equitable growth across regions. 
1.1. Understanding the investment needs for climate action  
Greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise and the world is faced with the critical risk 
of exceeding the 1.5°C threshold of temperature rise and the consequential severe 
climate impacts. Global emissions reached a record 57.1 GtCO₂e in 2023, up 1.3% from 
2022 (UNEP, 2024a). Under current policies, global warming is projected to reach 
approximately 3.1°C by the end of the century, far exceeding the Paris Agreement’s 1.5°C 
target (ibid.). Failing to meet the Paris goals would have devastating consequences, with 
even the half-degree difference between 1.5°C and 2°C posing severe risks, particularly 
given that on-the-ground adaptation efforts remain insufficient (UNEP, 2024b). Exceeding 
1.5°C could push the world past tipping points in critical ecosystems, such as the 
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, coral reefs and permafrost, triggering feedback loops 
that accelerate warming (Armstrong McKay et al., 2022). At 2°C, the likelihood of 
Key findings 
• Investments in all areas of climate action must increase across all 
economies: $6.5 trillion is needed on average per year by 2030 to meet 
climate targets in advanced economies, China, and EMDCs other than China. 
• The largest increase in investment is required in EMDCs other than China: 
these regions currently have low investment levels, significant development 
needs, and are projected to contribute over 50% of global emissions by 2030. 
• Investment needs are most clearly defined in the energy transition sector: 
while other areas have more uncertainty, sufficient data exists to provide 
directional estimates that can guide financing pathways across regions. 
• Any shortfall in investment before 2030 will place added pressure on the 
years that follow, creating a steeper and potentially more costly path to 
climate stability. The less the world achieves now, the more we will need to 
invest later. 
 
12 
 
irreversible damage to ecosystems including the Amazon Rainforest and global oceans 
rises sharply, leading to severe sea level rise, species extinction, and large-scale carbon 
release. Such impacts would threaten millions of human lives, displace hundreds of 
millions, and fuel resource conflicts. 
Meanwhile, EMDCs other than China face significant financial shortfalls amid 
unfulfilled Sustainable Development Goals. Since 2019, the combined impacts of COVID-
19, conflicts, climate-related disruptions and inequality have pushed an additional 23 
million people into extreme poverty and over 100 million into hunger (UN, 2024). Economic 
growth per capita in half of the world’s most vulnerable nations lags behind advanced 
economies, reversing earlier progress (ibid.). Furthermore, unprecedented levels of external 
debt in low- and middle-income countries limit their capacity to invest in crucial climate 
and development measures. The needs and opportunities are especially significant in these 
countries: they are the countries that will account for the largest share of the increase in 
investments needed for a global energy transition, they are the most vulnerable to climate 
impacts, and they are home to the vast preponderance of the world’s nature and 
biodiversity resources. 
Global climate investment to align temperature trajectories with the Paris Agreement 
goals, foster development and address the needs of the most vulnerable currently falls 
short of what is required. Insufficient funding is directed towards mitigation, adaptation 
and nature-based solutions, whereas substantial investments continue to flow into fossil 
fuel industries and environmentally harmful activities. Although existing economic and 
political structures have not delivered sustainable or equitable outcomes, climate action 
offers an opportunity to unlock new, more inclusive and sustainable economic pathways. 
Developing countries’ latest nationally determined contributions (NDCs) estimate 
annual financial needs between $455 billion and $584 billion by 2030 (UNFCCC 
Standing Committee on Finance, 2024). However, these figures likely fall short of the true 
requirements: they only encompass NDCs with specific costings, which cover around half 
of the 5,760 costed and non-costed needs to address climate change identified by 98 
developing countries, plus few current NDCs comprehensively cost the investment needs 
for accelerated energy transition, planned adaptation actions, loss and damage efforts, 
nature protection and conservation, or the just transition. 
In this report, refining the approach used in our previous report, we provide updated 
estimates of investment needs of what is required for delivery on the Paris Agreement, 
across five key areas:  
• Clean energy transition  
• Adaptation and resilience 
• Loss and damage 
• Natural capital  
• Just transition  
Our analysis confirms that annual investment of $2.4 trillion per year by 2030 is 
essential for EMDCs other than China to meet climate goals, more than quadrupling 
2022 spending.2 By 2035, these investments will need to rise further to $3.1–3.5 trillion 
annually to maintain the momentum needed – though the pace of increase will be less 
steep than needed by 2030. Although these targets are ambitious, we believe they are 
achievable through the steps outlined in Chapter 3. 
 
2 ‘$’ indicates US dollars throughout the report. All figures are in 2023 prices.  
13 
 
The global landscape of climate investment has seen a substantial uptick in the past 
three to four years, driven largely by a surge in financing for the energy transition, 
reflecting promising progress overall (Naran et al., 2024). However, this momentum has 
been concentrated in advanced economies and China. Despite recent progress, EMDCs 
other than China accounted for only 8% of the increase in clean energy investment from 
2019 to 2023 (IEA, 2024a). The gap in adaptation and resilience funding is widening, and 
EMDCs face significant funding shortfalls, especially in critical areas like sustainable 
agriculture and biodiversity conservation. Furthermore, aggregate climate investment 
needs remain vast and require urgent, frontloaded action, particularly in the crucial period 
between now and 2030, if we are to meet global climate and development goals.  
We estimate that the global projected investment requirement for climate action is 
approximately $6.3–6.7 trillion per year by 2030, including $2.7–2.8 trillion in advanced 
economies, $1.3–1.4 trillion in China, and $2.3–2.5 trillion in EMDCs other than China.3 
These latter countries will account for almost 45% of the average incremental investment 
needs from now to 2030 but they have been falling behind, especially Sub-Saharan Africa. 
This momentum for climate investment must be sustained beyond 2030. Our 
assessment suggests that the pace of investment growth could moderate after 2030 – if 
we are able to meet the urgent, frontloaded investment needs of the coming decade. 
Achieving the required $6.3–6.7 trillion in climate investments per year by 2030 will be 
critical to setting the foundation for a more stable, manageable trajectory afterwards.  
The global projected need could reach approximately $7–8.1 trillion per year by 2035, 
reflecting a plateauing of investments needed in advanced economies and China, and a 
slower pace of increase in other EMDCs (see Figure 1.1). The balance of investments tilts 
further to EMDCs, with advanced economies needing $2.6–3.1 trillion, China $1.3–1.5 
trillion, and EMDCs other than China requiring $3.1–3.5 trillion. These needs are our 
estimations of what is required for delivery on the Paris Agreement, and the investments 
will also make a vital contribution to sustainable growth and the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
The delay in action to date means we will need to mobilise even larger sums in shorter 
timeframes to catch up on critical targets. Additionally, investment needs for 
adaptation and resilience, as well as loss and damage, will rise sharply as climate risks 
escalate. Closing the gap by 2030 is essential, not only to reduce future financial demands 
but also to ensure a just and manageable transition towards global climate and 
development goals. 
  
 
3 Numbers may not sum to totals due to rounding. 
14 
 
Figure 1.1. Total climate investment needs by economic regions for 2030 and 2035 
 
 
Clean energy transition 
Achieving a global clean energy transition requires a major step up in investment 
across advanced economies, China, and EMDCs other than China, reaching around 
$4.8 trillion per year by 2030 and $5.3 trillion per year by 2035, compared with $1.88 trillion 
in 2023 and $1.25 trillion in 2019 (IEA, 2024a). Investments in the clean energy transition 
represent the largest portion of total capital needed for climate action in both 2030 and 
2035. In contrast with their low share in investment in the past five years, EMDCs other 
than China will account for almost 50% of the increase in needed clean energy 
investments in 2035 to meet global climate goals. They will be the driving force of the 
clean energy transformation. These countries, driven by demographic growth and 
economic expansion, face rising energy demand and must build energy infrastructure from 
the ground up to support sustainable development. As such, the commitments made at 
COP28 to triple global renewable energy capacity and double the rate of energy efficiency 
improvements by 2030 will require significantly greater investment increases in EMDCs 
other than China than in both advanced economies and China (IEA, 2024a). 
 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
2022 2030 2035 2022 2030 2035 2022 2030 2035
Advanced economies China EMDCs other than China
US$ billion (2023)
Clean energy transition Adaptation and resilience Loss and damage
Natural capital Just transition
15 
 
Figure 1.2. Clean energy investment needs by economic regions for 2030 and 2035 
 
Note: Clean energy investment needs are estimated based on IEA projections, supplemented with additional 
figures to account for early coal phase-out and just transition-related costs. 
To stay on track with climate goals, clean energy investment in EMDCs other than 
China must increase almost fivefold from 2022 to reach $1.6 trillion per year by 2030, 
rising to between $2.1 trillion per year by 2035 (see Figure 1.2). These targets are based 
on the projections made by the International Energy Agency (IEA, 2024b) but are slightly 
higher, as our estimates also cover the costs of early phase-out of coal and other just 
transition related costs. Currently, much of the investment is concentrated in a few large 
economies including India and Brazil, while many developing nations and regions face 
limited investment in clean energy projects due to challenging policy environments, high 
costs of capital, and lower returns compared with fossil fuel investments. Sub-Saharan 
Africa receives the least investment despite its vast potential for renewable energy, 
attracting only $12 per capita in energy transition investments in 2023 – 40 times less than 
the global average (IRENA, 2024a). Indeed, EMDCs are rich in renewable resources, 
holding 70% of global solar and wind resources and 50% of critical minerals. This presents 
an opportunity to build resilient, low-emission power systems and leapfrog traditional 
energy models (Singh and Bond, 2024). 
Investment needs vary across regions, with the Middle East requiring up to a 15-fold 
increase in clean energy spending per year by 2035 from 2022 levels. Despite having 
some of the highest solar potential globally, the Middle East accounted for around only 1% 
of clean energy investment in 2023 (IEA, 2024a). Similarly, in Africa, where around 80% of 
the global population without access to electricity live, clean energy investment increased 
by only $11 billion from 2019 to 2023. In 2023, the continent attracted just 2% of global 
clean energy investment (ibid.), highlighting a significant funding gap that demands a 
sevenfold increase in spending by 2030 and a ninefold increase by 2035. Closing this 
investment gap could not only drive sustainable development and accelerate the clean 

16 
 
energy transition in these regions but also create a powerful engine for global transition 
efforts by enabling substantial clean energy exports.  
A renewables revolution holds the potential to transform regions that have historically 
lagged behind, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, where energy transformation could 
lay the foundation for green industrialisation (G20 TF-CLIMA Group of Experts, 2024; 
UNECA, 2024). Yet, to truly realise these benefits, the clean energy transition must extend 
beyond simply replacing fossil fuels. It needs to drive a ’whole-of-economy’ transformation 
by establishing new industries and value chains that support sustainable, inclusive growth 
across all sectors. Without this kind of economy-wide shift, the renewable energy 
transition may fall short of delivering on the broader development goals essential for 
meaningful progress. 
Adaptation and resilience 
Adaptation and resilience remain critically underfunded. As climate impacts intensify, 
the need for adaptation investment becomes urgent, especially in vulnerable regions 
already facing high poverty, limited services and governance challenges. Without 
adequate adaptation investment, these communities risk losing decades of development 
progress. Despite this urgency, global adaptation finance in 2022 reached only $76 billion – 
just 5% of total climate finance flows (Naran et al., 2024). Current funding in EMDCs 
other than China is far below the $200–300 billion needed annually by 2030 and the 
further $300–400 billion per year by 2035. Adaptation investment must grow and shift 
from a reactive, incremental, project-based approach to anticipatory, strategic and 
transformational action, especially in vulnerable and non-market sectors (UNEP, 2024b). 
Focusing only on technical or easily funded solutions, as in mitigation, will not achieve the 
needed scale or type of adaptation (ibid.). 
Loss and damage 
Loss and damage from climate change are escalating, but estimating the full costs is 
challenging due to the lack of a universally agreed definition, limited data, and the 
difficulty in predicting future adverse climate events. In 2022, EMDCs suffered over $109 
billion in economic losses from major climate events, excluding non-economic impacts like 
health and cultural heritage losses (Richards et al., 2023). Between 2000 and 2019, 
Vulnerable Twenty (V20) economies lost around $525 billion due to climate change, 
averaging $143 billion annually in extreme weather-related costs (V20, 2022). While 
progress has been made with the creation of the Fund for Responding to Loss and 
Damage at COP27, which received initial pledges of nearly $700 million at COP28, this 
funding falls short of the needs of EMDCs other than China, which we estimate to be at 
least $250 billion per year by 2030 and upwards of $400 billion per year by 2035. 
Natural capital 
Investing in nature not only supports climate and development goals but also yields 
significant economic payoffs. Nature-based solutions such as conservation and 
sustainable land management could cut emissions by 11.3 billion tonnes of CO₂-equivalent 
by 2030, comparable to putting a stop to burning oil globally (Griscom et al., 2017) and 
offering a cost-effective approach that also supports jobs, poverty reduction and food 
security. In addition, every $1 invested in ecosystem restoration can yield returns of $7–30 
(Verdone and Seidl, 2017). Sustainable agriculture is particularly critical to simultaneously 
advance mitigation, adaptation and development objectives. However, funding is 
insufficient and biased towards advanced economies, despite more than 70% of the 
investment needs in natural capital being concentrated in EMDCs other than China. To 
tackle climate change, global investments in natural capital must increase from $46 billion 
in 2022 (Naran et al., 2024) to $400 billion per year by 2030 and $480–580 billion per year 
17 
 
by 2035, of which the predominant share must be in EMDCs. Recent international 
commitments, including the Kunming-Montreal Biodiversity Framework, highlight 
progress, but accelerated funding and action are critical to protect ecosystems and foster 
resilience against climate impacts. 
Just transition 
A just transition is crucial for an equitable shift to a low-carbon economy, especially in 
EMDCs, where the impacts of this shift will be felt most acutely. While the transition 
unlocks significant social and economic opportunities (see section 1.4), it also demands 
fundamental economic restructuring – disrupting jobs, shifting prices and introducing new 
standards and regulations. Managing these disruptions is essential to ensure equity, 
sustain public support, and secure the political commitment needed to reach net zero 
goals. Achieving a just transition requires investment in people, communities and, in some 
cases, direct income support. Effective climate finance must prioritise justice and inclusion, 
ensuring fair resource distribution, addressing historical inequities and engaging 
marginalised communities. We estimate that global financing needs for the just transition 
will reach at least $70 billion per year by 2030 and $95 billion per year by 2035.4 Only a few 
country-specific assessments exist on the investment needed to ensure a just transition. 
For example, South Africa is estimated to require $10 billion by 2050 to support 
communities affected by this shift (Blended Finance Taskforce and Centre for 
Sustainability Transitions, 2022).  
Figure 1.3 presents our revised assessment of investment requirements in EMDCs other 
than China, which has been updated further to our 2023 report based on the latest 
data and a new series of studies. We provide a comprehensive representation of 
investment needs, both in total and by investment areas, with the energy transition 
remaining the main component of the investment needs.  
Figure 1.3. Investment/spending requirements for climate and sustainable 
development in EMDCs other than China (US$ billion per year by 2030, increment from 
current in parentheses)
 
 
 
4 These figures exclude the costs specific to the energy transition (early phase-out of coal and just 
transition-related costs), which are included in our estimates of clean energy investment needs.  

18 
 
Our estimates of climate investment requirements differ from some other 
assessments mainly due to variations in sectoral coverage and methodological 
approaches. For the energy transition, we have based our assessment on the International 
Energy Agency’s (IEA’s) recent estimates and projections which provide granular 
information on the financing requirements both for the energy supply and decarbonisation 
of energy demand. Estimates provided by the Energy Transitions Commission (ETC, 2024) 
are lower, principally because of differences in coverage. Similarly, the Climate Policy 
Initiative’s (CPI’s) assessment draws on the available range of studies for key elements of 
the energy transition (Strinati et al., 2024; UNEP, 2024a), some of which have higher 
estimates than the IEA, especially for industry.  
1.2. Uneven gains for rapid cost reductions in clean technology  
Dramatic declines in clean technology costs are reshaping the global energy 
landscape. Between 2010 and 2023, the cost of clean energy technologies dropped 
sharply, establishing renewables as the most cost-effective choice for new power 
generation in many regions (IRENA, 2024b). Solar photovoltaic (PV) technology, for 
instance, saw costs fall by 90% from $0.460/kWh in 2010 to just $0.044/kWh in 2023 
(ibid.). Onshore wind also saw a 70% drop over the same period, making it significantly 
cheaper than fossil fuels at $0.033/kWh, while offshore wind costs fell by 63%, driven by 
advances in turbine technology and supply chain efficiencies (ibid.). With China’s rapid 
expansion in renewable energy capacity, prices (notably of solar panels) continue to 
decline, with projections suggesting they may soon reach record lows. This downward 
trend is expected to persist as China’s large-scale capacity growth and strong competition 
among providers drive further cost reductions, making renewables even more accessible 
on a global scale. 
These cost reductions position renewables as a strategic tool for energy security, price 
stability and sustainability. With renewables now frequently undercutting fossil fuels on 
costs, investing in solar and wind is not only environmentally sound but also economically 
wise. This moment provides a unique opportunity for developing countries to bypass 
traditional energy models and capitalise on the advantages of clean technology. 
Realising these benefits requires fully tackling integration challenges. Grid upgrades 
and regulatory reforms are essential to leveraging renewables’ full potential, enhancing 
energy resilience and reducing dependence on costly and volatile fossil fuels. 
While global cost reductions in clean technologies are promising, they do not appear 
to be reaching all regions equally. Weaknesses in supply chains, distribution networks 
and technical expertise contribute to this disparity, and these challenges are compounded 
by variations in the cost of capital, which further raise project costs. Limited access to 
infrastructure like grid systems also slows down the adoption of lower-cost solar and wind 
technologies. To bridge this gap, targeted financial support and capacity-building 
initiatives are essential to make clean energy both affordable and accessible where it is 
needed most. 
1.3. Unlocking savings and generating employment and economic  
growth opportunities  
Robust climate action presents not only an opportunity to mitigate climate risks but 
also a pathway to significant economic, financial and social benefits, from 
accelerating growth to fostering resilience and stability. Climate investments can drive 
powerful multiplier effects through various channels, especially in today’s context of weak 
global investment demand. Increasing climate-focused investments stimulates 
19 
 
productivity gains and innovation in critical areas such as energy, cities, land use and 
transport. Transitioning to a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy further promises 
significant savings and avoided costs related to environmentally harmful activities. Yet, 
the long-term benefits of these investments remain under-quantified, even as they 
contribute directly to a more sustainable economic future. 
The clean energy transition brings substantial direct economic and financial benefits. 
Moving to a net zero scenario could save around $500 billion annually by 2030 by reducing 
fossil fuel investments (IEA, 2023). Additionally, shifting from fossil fuels lowers fuel import 
and consumption costs – renewable energy additions since 2000 alone saved $409 billion 
globally in 2023 (IRENA, 2024). Renewable energy also offers vast efficiency gains: nearly 
two-thirds of fossil fuel energy is lost in production and delivery, costing $4.6 trillion per 
year (Walter et al., 2024). Renewables reduce this waste, eliminate the need for fossil fuel 
subsidies – currently $1.5 trillion explicitly and $5.7 trillion implicitly (Black et al., 2023; IISD 
and OECD, 2024) – and make funds available for sustainable investments.  
Investing in natural ecosystems also yields direct economic and financial benefits. 
Harmful subsidies for agriculture, fisheries and forestry drive environmental degradation, 
costing $1.63 trillion annually (Koplow and Steenblik, 2024). Redirecting these funds could 
support sustainable practices and ecosystem protection. Sustainable practices also reduce 
input costs: for instance, the fertilizer markets are projected to reach $241.87 billion by 
2030 (Statista, 2024). Nature-positive practices such as regenerative agriculture reduce 
dependency on these inputs, bringing down costs and improving food security. 
Beyond direct economic and financial savings, all climate investment avoid immense 
economic and social costs from climate inaction. Economies face mounting climate 
impacts and insufficient resilience, with social and economic losses from inaction projected 
to reach at least $1,266 trillion between 2025 and 2100 (Alberti, 2024). Investing in climate 
adaptation is essential to prevent the economic toll of climate-related disasters, which 
amounted to $270 billion in losses in 2022 alone (Munich RE, 2024). Strategic adaptation 
measures, such as climate-resilient infrastructure and early warning systems, offer 
significant returns, with $1.8 trillion in adaptation investments from 2020–2030 estimated 
to yield $7.1 trillion in net benefits (Global Commission on Adaptation, 2021). While the 
magnitude of these avoided costs is large, they are not always fully quantified. The health-
related savings in particular could be sizeable: air pollution from fossil fuel combustion cost 
$4.95 trillion in healthcare expenses in 2021 alone (Romanello et al., 2024). Furthermore, 
clean energy helps avoid stranded assets, preventing unproductive investments in fossil 
fuel infrastructure. While the size of these stranded assets is difficult to estimate because 
it depends on different future scenarios and how they would affect the value of the 
underlying assets, potential stranded fossil fuel assets amount to at least $1 trillion 
(Semieniuk et al., 2022). 
As well as reducing losses from climate change, climate investments deliver 
significant co-benefits, including increased productivity and strengthened social 
stability. Addressing climate change boosts productivity through the replacement of 
outdated technologies and practices with cleaner and more efficient technologies and 
practices. Resilience investments also open up opportunities in high-risk areas: London’s 
Canary Wharf financial district, for example, depends on flood protection from the 
Thames Barrier. In low- and middle-income countries, every dollar invested in 
infrastructure resilience generates $4 in economic returns, highlighting the high value of 
adaptation investments in vulnerable regions (Hallegatte et al., 2019). Climate action also 
strengthens social stability by mitigating displacement and economic insecurity driven by 
climate-related disruptions and biodiversity loss. 
20 
 
Employment gains from climate action can be transformative. Climate investments 
generate more jobs per dollar invested than unsustainable alternatives, with net gains 
potentially reaching 27 million jobs by 2030 (New Climate Economy, 2018). Nature-based 
solutions, such as ecosystem restoration, can also yield high returns, generating jobs in 
sustainable tourism and conservation. To ensure these gains reach the most vulnerable, 
policymakers must prioritise job quality, regional access and gender inclusivity (Lankes et 
al., 2023). Skills training and support for disadvantaged communities, particularly women, 
are critical to a fair transition. 
Climate action is a growth catalyst and can unlock the growth story of the 21st 
century. Strong climate policies and investment can boost global output, adding as much 
as $26 trillion to the global economy by 2030 (New Climate Economy, 2018). In Africa 
alone, the shift to clean energy could increase output by 6.4% between 2021 and 2050 
(IRENA and AfDB, 2022). While impacts vary by region, climate-focused investments 
consistently stimulate growth, especially in developing regions, where clean infrastructure 
investments generate strong multiplier effects across industries. 
While climate action and poverty reduction often reinforce each other, ensuring that 
climate benefits reach the most vulnerable requires an integrated policy approach. 
Effective strategies must catalyse investments in human, natural, physical and social 
capital to support an inclusive, equitable transition and align climate goals with poverty 
alleviation efforts (Lankes et al., 2023). 
The direct savings from clean energy and nature investments could reach 11–18% of 
global GDP under a conservative estimate, while the savings arising from avoided 
costs and co-benefits of all climate investments could amount to at least 15–18% of 
global GDP (Figure 1.4). This transformation carries enormous macroeconomic 
implications, positioning climate action as a key driver of global economic stability and 
growth. These benefits and savings will depend on the pace of the transition and accrue 
over time. The challenge, therefore, is to foster the enabling conditions for the ramp-up  
of investments and mobilise finance of the right scale, of the right kind and at an 
affordable cost. 
 
21 
 
Figure 1.4. Potential savings from the shift to a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy 
per year in 2030 
 
 
 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Avoided costs and co-benefits (all climate
investments)
Direct savings from nature protection and
conservation
Direct savings from the shift to low-carbon
energy in production and use
US$ trillion
Low range Upper range
22 
 
2. Financing pathways to achieve the Paris 
Agreement goals 
This chapter examines the current state of global climate finance and the necessary 
pathways to achieve the Paris Agreement goals. Section 2.1 assesses recent trends, 
highlighting the growth in climate finance but underscoring the persistent shortfall and 
imbalances across regions and sectors, particularly for EMDCs. Section 2.2 outlines 
strategies to scale up financing gap to 2030 and beyond, proposing a coordinated 
approach that leverages domestic and international sources of finance, mobilises private 
sector participation, and taps into innovative funding sources to meet the urgent 
investment needs of a low-carbon, climate-resilient future. 
2.1. Where are we on climate finance?  
Global climate finance flows have grown significantly but remain insufficient. Annual 
investments crossed the trillion-dollar threshold in 2021/22, a milestone attributed to 
intensified commitments to the low-carbon transition (Naran et al., 2024). However, early 
estimates for 2023 suggest that while climate finance has continued to increase, it may 
reach only $1.5–1.6 trillion per year – still far below the levels necessary to meet climate 
goals (ibid.). This shortfall is further highlighted by the surge in explicit fossil fuel subsidies, 
which reached $1.5 trillion in 2022 (IISD and OECD, 2024), reflecting a persistent 
misallocation of resources that hinders sustainable progress. 
Regional and sectoral imbalances in climate finance allocation reveal serious 
disparities, in particular from the perspective of EMDCs other than China. In 2022, 
EMDCs other than China (including least developed countries [LDCs]) attracted only 17% 
of global climate finance, amounting to $244 billion, while the LDCs on their own received 
just 3% of total flows (Naran et al., 2024). The predominance of mitigation funding leaves 
adaptation finance at a mere 5% share, despite notable growth since 2018. Additionally, 
most investments are concentrated in energy and transport – sectors that together 
attracted 68% of funding in 2022 – while the agriculture, forestry and other land use 
(AFOLU) sector remains critically underfunded at only 3%, despite its importance for 
climate mitigation and biodiversity (ibid.). The focus of finance on traditionally male-
dominated sectors such as energy and transport means that women-dominated sectors 
like small-scale agriculture generally lack the finance needed for adaptation and 
investment in clean technologies.  
Private sector contributions to climate finance are increasing but remain 
geographically concentrated. In 2021/22, the private sector accounted for 50% of total 
climate finance, although most of this was directed to advanced economies, with only 7% 
benefitting EMDCs other than China (Naran et al., 2024). Additionally, private climate 
finance mobilised through official development finance is focused on developing countries 
with higher income levels and mitigation outcomes, similarly to climate finance overall 
(Taskin et al., 2024). The majority of climate finance is still delivered as debt (60% of total 
flows), and grants remain limited to just 6% (ibid.). This raises particular concerns for 
EMDCs that are experiencing high debt stress, as loan-based climate finance can intensify 
fiscal burdens. Moreover, this approach disproportionately affects women, who face 
greater barriers to accessing loans (Seema et al., 2021) and bear the brunt of fiscal 
adjustments (Ghosh, 2021), ultimately limiting their ability to adapt to climate change 
and engage in the new green economy.  
Transparency and accountability issues continue to undermine trust in climate finance 
commitments. Although advanced economies achieved, in 2022, the goal set at COP16 in 
23 
 
2010 of mobilising $100 billion annually for developing countries (OECD, 2024a), significant 
concerns remain regarding the transparency of reported versus delivered finance. This lack 
of clarity complicates the alignment of funds with local priorities and weakens trust in 
international climate commitments, creating challenges for effective climate action on 
the ground. Negotiations are underway on the New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG) on 
Climate Finance to establish a new, post-2025 climate finance target, with a focus on 
improving transparency, accountability and responsiveness to the financial needs of 
developing countries. However, reaching consensus on the scale, timeframe and reporting 
standards of the NCQG remains a complex task that will be critical to restoring confidence 
in climate finance systems. 
The UN-led climate negotiations have made important strides but highlight persistent 
funding gaps. Since the Paris Agreement, these negotiations have underscored the urgent 
need to address the financing imperatives of developing nations. Frameworks like the 
Glasgow Climate Pact and Sharm el-Sheikh Implementation Plan have amplified calls for 
support. These agreements advocate a reformed and inclusive climate finance system, 
including operational guidance under Article 2.1(c) to align financial flows with climate 
goals. The establishment of the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage at COP27 in 
2022 marked a major achievement, but significant challenges remain in fully 
operationalising finance mechanisms to support EMDCs effectively. 
2.2. Pathways to scaling up climate finance in EMDCs other than China to 
2030 and beyond 
EMDCs will face the greatest challenges in mobilising finance at the scale and pace 
needed. While ramping up climate finance is needed in both advanced economies and 
EMDCs, the task is much harder in EMDCs. China has considerable investment needs but 
also a well-developed system of public and private finance to be able to respond. At the 
same time, LDCs attract the lowest levels of private climate finance and generally have 
less developed financial systems (Taskin et al., 2024). There is a clear correlation between 
levels of private climate finance mobilised, financial system development and country 
income level (ibid.). Our focus, therefore, is on how to meet the financing needs of EMDCs 
other than China. 
The large and rapid scale-up of finance to support a big investment push can only be 
achieved by harnessing all pools of finance.  
• First, for each strand of finance, it is important to explore ambitious targets consistent 
with the investment goals but based on credible pathways to deliver the financing.  
• Second, the approach must utilise the comparative strengths of each strand in 
financing the different types of investment. Thus, private financing will be well suited 
to investments with well identified revenue streams such as renewables, multilateral 
development bank (MDB) finance for long-dated public infrastructure, and highly 
concessional or debt-free finance for loss and damage or sectors and countries at very 
high risk.  
• Third, it will be important to tap the synergies from the different strands of finance to 
enhance leverage and bring down risks and the cost of capital. MDB finance, financing 
from multilateral climate funds and bilateral climate finance all play a role in 
leveraging other sources including private finance, use different types of leveraging 
instruments with different risk characteristics, and focus on private finance 
mobilisation in different sectors. There is scope to expand new sources of climate 
finance, including through South–South cooperation and new ways of mobilising 
concessional climate finance, in addition to the traditional sources of climate finance 
24 
 
in the form of bilateral finance from advanced economies, MDB finance and private 
finance.  
• Fourth, the full toolbox of financial instruments needs to be used: grants, concessional, 
debt, guarantees, equity and local currency products. 
Figure 2.1 presents the mix and scale of domestic and external financing to meet the 
climate investment goal by 2030 in EMDCs other than China and Figure 2.2 shows the 
potential mix of financing to meet different investment requirements in these countries. 
Figure 2.1. Financing climate action in EMDCs other than China by 2030 – matching 
sources to needs 
 
Figure 2.2. Mobilising the necessary financing for EMDCs other than China ($ billion 
per year by 2030, increment from current in parentheses)
 
Notes: *Includes household savings. **A significant proportion of this private finance would be directly and 
indirectly catalysed by MDBs, other development finance institutions and bilateral finance. ***Includes 
multilateral climate funds. 
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
Energy transition Adaptation and
resilience
Loss and damage Natural capital Just transition
US$ billion
Domestic public Domestic private International private MDBs
Bilateral South South Other concessional

25 
 
Domestic resources, which currently account for around 70% of climate finance, can 
reasonably finance $1.4 trillion of the total investment need of $2.4 trillion by 2030 and 
$1.9 trillion of the total investment need of $3.2 trillion by 2035. Of this, around 60% 
would be domestic public resource mobilisation and around 40% private, including from 
households and companies. The role of the private sector will be much more important 
than in the past given the changing nature of investment. Investments in the clean energy 
transition are now predominantly private and there are greater opportunities even in 
adaptation and natural capital. Domestic private finance has a leading role to play given 
the proximity to local project developers and companies, with households also playing a 
key role. Local development finance institutions (DFIs) also have a critical role in scaling up 
and crowding in private finance. As shown in Figure 2.2, public resource mobilisation would 
need to increase by almost three times by 2030 and domestic private finance by seven to 
eight times. 
External finance from all sources, international public and private as well as other 
sources, needs to cover $1 trillion of the total investment need by 2030 and around 
$1.3 trillion by 2035. As the most rapidly growing component of climate finance over the 
last five years, MDBs account for about half of international climate finance, and mobilise 
the vast majority of private climate finance. Given the important direct and catalytic role 
that MDBs play, the IHLEG and the G20-mandated Independent Expert Group (IEG) on 
MDB Reform have both argued that financing by the MDBs needs to triple by 2030.  
There is a credible path to achieve such a tripling. External private finance to EMDCs 
other than China at present is only around $30 billion. It can and must reach $450–500 
billion by 2030, an increase of 15 to 18 times. This is the most important task in reaching 
the $1 trillion needed in external finance and will require a major revamp in approach and 
partnerships. In particular, the amount of external finance directly and indirectly mobilised 
by MDBs and bilateral climate finance will have to increase many fold. Bilateral climate 
finance, which was around $41 billion in 2022, needs to at least double by 2030 given the 
central role that it plays in supporting priority needs of developing countries and in 
anchoring the NCQG. The amount of concessional finance within this must more than 
double given the priority needs. The increased integration of climate action into 
development finance is a welcome development in this regard (OECD, 2024b). There is 
also great scope for expanding bilateral DFI lending and export credits. 
Non-traditional financing sources can play an important role in closing the financing 
gap. There is tremendous potential for expanding South–South cooperation on climate 
finance. The comparative advantage and huge capacity of China on clean energy, and the 
greening of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), position China well to provide developing 
countries with critically needed support in deploying the lowest cost of available 
technologies and at a reasonable cost of finance. Some other emerging market leaders 
such as India and Brazil can also make an important contribution. High-income and 
upper-middle-income countries should also contribute to expanding low-cost climate 
finance, including through the MDBs and the multilateral climate funds. Finally, the larger 
DFIs such as the Brazilian development bank BNDES and the Development Bank of South 
Africa can expand financing in their own regions. 
New sources of concessional finance will need to be pursued given the large 
prospective needs. Bilateral climate finance will not be sufficient to meet the total need 
for concessional finance. These prospective sources include voluntary carbon markets, use 
of special drawing rights (SDRs), solidarity levies on internationally polluting activities, 
other international taxes, debt swaps and private philanthropy. This could raise around 
$150 billion in additional revenues by 2030, an increase of 10 to 15 times from current levels 
(see further Section 3.7). 
26 
 
Building a climate finance system that meets the test of both scale and quality 
requires shifting beyond a traditional focus on mobilising funding to prioritising 
impact and systemic change. This approach calls for climate finance that is not only 
scaled up but also accessible, predictable, affordable and transparent, to drive meaningful 
outcomes. In addition, this framework must be rooted in the principles of justice and 
inclusion, ensuring that resources are equitably distributed, historical responsibilities are 
acknowledged, and diverse stakeholders, particularly marginalised communities, are 
included in decision-making. Increased attention to gender equality is crucial for climate 
finance that effectively addresses the different constraints, challenges and opportunities 
for men and women. Agreement and implementation of Article 2.1(c) of the Paris 
Agreement, which requires “finance flows [to be] consistent with a pathway towards low 
greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development”, can give powerful impetus 
to making the climate finance architecture more effective.  
A fit-for-purpose climate finance agenda has important implications for the New 
Collective Quantified Goal on Climate Finance. As set out here, such a framework must 
bring together the different strands of finance to deliver on the Paris Agreement and 
related Sustainable Development Goals. In terms of the scale of ambition, per year, 
around $2.4 trillion of climate finance will be needed by 2030 and around $3.3 trillion by 
2035. With a major push on domestic resource mobilisation, per year, at least $1 trillion of 
external finance must be mobilised by 2030 and around $1.3 trillion by 2035. To deliver on 
this, ambitious but credible targets will be needed for private cross-border finance, 
multilateral climate finance including from MDBs, and especially for bilateral climate 
finance. There must also be an explicit recognition of the need to mobilise other sources of 
concessional finance. These targets should foster synergies and incentives to leverage 
private finance especially, in order to achieve scale and effectiveness. The target for 
finance to be provided and mobilised by developed countries should be consistent with the 
larger goals. It too should be based on principles of accountability and transparency.  
Agreement on the NCQG is a matter for the Parties. This framework provides the key 
conceptual and practical set of numbers for climate finance and can inform discussions 
about the NCQG, with its overall external finance of $1 trillion per year to EMDCs other 
than China by 2030, and its basic elements of private, MDB, bilateral and other 
concessional flows. These numbers come from a transparent and deductive analysis of the 
finance required for the investments that will be necessary for delivery of the Paris 
Agreement targets. Without these investments in EMDCs other than China, the world will 
fail to achieve those goals. To deliver the $1 trillion of external finance, ambitious but 
credible targets will be required for the different strands, recognising the need for synergies 
and leveraging power to achieve scale and effectiveness. The tripling of MDB finance, for 
example, is crucial to scaling up private finance and reducing the cost of capital. This 
framework and the key elements within it should be the main focus of the NCQG. 
Within this larger framework, advanced economies need to demonstrate a credible 
commitment, including through the NCQG, to provide and mobilise the finance 
needed for climate action in developing countries. This would entail a tripling of the 
$100 billion annual commitment made at COP16 for 2020, and reaffirmed and extended to 
2025 at COP21 in 2015. Other stakeholders also need to come forward with ambitious 
commitments, including the MDBs, the private sector, and developing countries that are in 
a position to provide support. Indeed, South–South cooperation between EMDCs is already 
making a significant contribution and there is great scope for enhanced support and 
financing from leading developing countries. All commitments should be based on 
accountability and transparency, with clear objectives on both the quantity and quality of 
the finance to be provided. 
27 
 
3. Accelerating delivery of the action agenda on 
climate finance 
Momentum has been building on the climate finance agenda since COP26. COP26, 
COP27 and COP28 all made climate finance a central priority, with the IHLEG providing 
independent input on the climate finance agenda. The Global Climate Finance Framework 
launched by the UAE COP28 Presidency in 2023 and supported by the IHLEG set out an 
action agenda to deliver adequate, accessible and affordable climate finance that has 
been endorsed by an important coalition of world leaders. Since then, the COP28 
Presidency has convened key stakeholders on the implementation of the agenda in 
partnership with the IHLEG.  
COP29 and COP30 will be crucial in taking forward this climate finance agenda with 
the need to agree on the New Collective Quantified Goal, launch a new round of 
ambitious NDCs in 2025, and accelerate the implementation of the agenda set out in the 
Global Climate Finance Framework. Other opportunities in 2025 include the Financing for 
Development conference in June, and the G20 agenda under the South African Presidency 
with its summit in Rio de Janeiro.  
A big push is required on three priorities: (i) to prepare and implement high-quality 
investments; (ii) to put in place the necessary macroeconomic and sectoral policy and 
institutional reforms and tackle the severe constraints facing many countries due to high 
debt and limited fiscal space; and (iii) to mobilise finance at scale and improve access to 
affordable capital. This chapter reviews the key elements of this action agenda after first 
setting out some of the main stakeholder groups. 
3.1. Key stakeholders in delivering the climate finance agenda 
Climate finance now features prominently in all key international discussions, 
including the UN, the G20 the international finance institutions (IFIs) and the  
private sector. 
The G20 has put climate and climate finance at the centre of its agenda. The Brazilian 
G20 Presidency launched a Task Force for the Global Mobilization Against Climate 
Change (‘TF-Clima’) to promote a high-level dialogue among governments, financial 
institutions and international organisms to enhance global macroeconomic and financial 
alignment to implement the goals of the Paris Agreement. An important aspect was 
bringing together Ministries of Environment, Finance and Foreign Affairs with a wide range 
of stakeholders. An action agenda emerging from TF-Clima will be adopted by G20 
Leaders in November 2024. The Brazilian G20 Presidency also commissioned an expert 
group that published its report A Green and Just Planet in October 2024 (G20 TF-Clima 
Group of Experts, 2024). 
Central banks, regulators and finance ministries have also come together strongly on 
the climate action agenda. The Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), 
which has enlarged to 141 members comprising central banks and regulators, and the 
Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action (CFMCA), which now comprises finance 
ministries from 95 countries, have become important networks to build consensus and 
ambition on the climate action agenda. The CFMCA presented its second joint Climate 
Action Statement (CAS) at its October Ministerial, with over 60 members setting out 
nearly 500 climate actions covering climate policy coordination and strategic economic 
planning, the scaling-up of green finance, implementing carbon pricing, phasing out 
28 
 
inefficient subsidies, and addressing macroeconomic climate and nature risks and 
financing gaps. 
Several other important coalitions have also emerged to identify and pursue priorities 
for action. These include the Bridgetown Initiative, with Bridgetown 3.0 launched in 
September 2024, the Paris Pact for People and the Planet (4P) with a permanent 
secretariat now established at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), the Nairobi Declaration of the Africa Climate Summit, and the V20 
action agenda. These have led to some other initiatives such as the Expert Review on Debt, 
Nature and Climate launched by Colombia, Kenya, France and Germany, and the Global 
Solidarity Levies Task Force led by Barbados, France and Kenya.  
Further key stakeholders, including the MDBs and public development banks more 
broadly, the private sector and private philanthropy, are all engaged in ramping up 
progress on the climate finance agenda. In addition to the UNFCCC, other parts of the 
UN and the international finance institutions (IFIs) have a crucial role to play in advancing 
the climate finance agenda. There is a big push underway on MDB reform with support for 
climate action and finance at the centre. The Finance in Common Summit that brings 
together all public development banks has also made climate finance a central priority.  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the OECD are also playing major roles in 
advancing the climate finance agenda in their respective spheres. Several private sector 
coalitions and institutions are engaged on how to bolster private sector engagement and 
mobilise private finance for climate action, especially in EMDCs; these include the Glasgow 
Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), Global Investors for Sustainable Development 
(GISD) Alliance, Sustainable Markets Initiative (SMI), Investor Leadership Network (ILN) 
and the World Economic Forum (WEF). Other initiatives include the Green Guarantee 
Group launched by the German government at COP28 to better understand and promote 
the use of guarantees. Private philanthropy is also now much more systematically 
engaged on climate finance and its own role. Finally, think tanks, academic institutions 
and civil society organisations across the world are contributing to the assessment of 
progress and the agenda for further action. 
Recognising the need to bring together these different strands and stakeholders 
around a shared and ambitious agenda, the UN Climate Change Executive Secretary 
in partnership with the IHLEG convened two roundtables to take stock of and impart 
momentum on the climate finance action agenda. Taking place in June 2024 in Bonn 
and in September in New York, an important outcome was an integrated action agenda to 
provide the basis for continued engagement with key stakeholders on progress and 
priorities for action with a focus on upcoming deliverables. As described in Chapter 4, it is 
complemented by a more systematic monitoring and tracking effort in partnership with 
the Climate Policy Initiative (CPI). 
3.2. Unlocking climate investment at scale 
All EMDCs need to foster and scale up climate investments. As our last report 
underlined, scaling up climate finance cannot happen without ramping up investment 
programmes and projects, and this requires concerted actions on three fronts:  
• First, countries must set out well articulated strategies and transition plans to provide 
clear direction, including to the private sector. The upcoming round of NDCs provides 
an excellent opportunity to set out well defined investment and financing plans that 
can deliver on climate goals and are anchored in national development strategies and 
plans. Countries must take a holistic approach that considers the links between 
29 
 
climate and development and sets out clear implementation strategies and monitoring 
systems. This must include strong understanding of and plans for a just transition. 
• Second, countries must put in place and strengthen institutional structures for 
translating strategies into tangible investment programmes and project pipelines.  
EMDC governments should lead on co-creation of investment programmes in key 
sectors with the private sector and development finance institutions. Emerging good 
practice such as the GFANZ-BNDES partnership in Brazil needs to be replicated. Project 
preparation facilities should be scaled up by expanding the Global Infrastructure 
Facility and harnessing new private sector initiatives. One-stop-shop facilities and 
initiatives to connect project opportunities with investors can help unlock private 
finance. 
• Third, countries need to pursue sustained policy and institutional reforms to tackle 
barriers to investment and incentivise the shift to low-carbon climate-resilient 
development. In partnership with DFIs and the private sector, countries must identify 
and tackle binding constraints focused on priority sectors such as the expansion of 
renewables. They must deploy a mix of policies to accelerate transitions in critical 
systems such as energy and food, including carbon pricing, labelling, regulations, feed-
in tariffs, subsidies and direct investments. They must streamline planning and 
permitting while adhering to strong environmental and social safeguards. While many 
EMDCs have started along this path, deploying explicit carbon taxes and emissions 
trading schemes, coverage and prices vary widely and must be strengthened to 
maximise the level and impact of investments. 
Country platforms, led and owned by countries with the involvement of all 
stakeholders including DFIs and the private sector, can create the basis to unlock 
investments and to accelerate and scale up climate finance with transformational 
impact. There is a growing momentum on the adoption and implementation of country 
platforms. The Brazilian G20 Presidency has put particular emphasis on country platforms 
as a powerful instrument to enhance collaboration and attract private investment and 
finance, with Brazil launching its own country platform supporting its Ecological Transition 
Plan in October 2024. There are now several countries with ongoing platforms focused on 
sector transitions and climate resilience, including Egypt, Indonesia, Senegal, South Africa 
and Vietnam. Lessons from these country platforms can help the development of a new 
generation of country/sector platforms. Strong involvement and support from the MDBs 
and development partners, combined with the early engagement of the private sector, is 
of vital importance. Robust financing packages including sufficient concessional financing 
and predictable long-term financing are crucial to implementing ambitious investment 
and transition plans.  
This whole agenda will require stronger and better coordinated efforts to build capacity 
across all levels of institutions. 
3.3. Managing debt and fiscal space 
Public debt in EMDCs has risen following the sharp currency depreciations and modest 
increase in fiscal deficits as governments responded to COVID-19 and concurrent 
energy and food crises. At the same time, the creditworthiness of many developing 
countries declined in 2023 and 2024, when their ability to refinance bunched maturity 
repayments on private bonds and loans became more difficult. No developing country 
issued a new bond on global markets in 2023. There are 117 EMDCs with readily available or 
inferable public long-term credit ratings, all but 12 of which have credit ratings that are 
worse than investment grade. These countries have faced tighter global capital markets in 
30 
 
the last two years with higher interest rates, lower risk tolerance and a flight to quality 
(Kharas and Rivard, 2024). Many low-income countries are particularly vulnerable to being 
shut out or priced out of global capital markets (Mawejje, 2024). 
Elevated debt burden presents finance ministers with a dilemma – retrench fiscally or 
increase mitigation and adaptation spending. Retrenching fiscally is the typical 
recommendation of international financial institutions on how to manage debt distress. 
But they would then not have the fiscal space to invest in the green transition and a 
pathway to growth, nor in adaptation and resilience measures that could reduce the 
damage done by climate change. A climate-induced natural disaster would leave them 
vulnerable to further debt distress. The alternative, to scale up mitigation and adaptation 
spending, could increase debt risks.  
Between these two extremes are many possible pathways. Strong institutional 
structures for managing public debt can create the pre-conditions for moving forward 
with a debt-financed investment push. Countries with well-prepared investment 
programmes and a capacity for effective implementation can more readily pursue an 
investment push while managing debt burdens in the long run. When the investments 
enjoy a sound financial rate of return, as in many renewable energy generation projects, 
creditworthiness is improved even if indebtedness is temporarily raised. This effect is 
amplified if countries can access low-cost, long-term financing for such projects, for 
example from multilateral or other official financial institutions. Kharas and Rivard (2022) 
show scenarios in which countries with access to such financing for scaled-up climate-
positive investments achieve stronger growth paths and better creditworthiness compared 
with ‘business as usual’ scenarios. According to the interim report of the Independent 
Expert Group on Debt, Nature and Climate (2024), a green growth model is feasible and 
sustainable, but achieving this virtuous circle will require a step change in financing. 
Reaching agreement with international financial institutions on affordable medium-term 
expenditure frameworks that incorporate sound growth, investment and transformation 
programmes is critical. 
A structured approach to providing financing solutions to countries with different 
circumstances will be needed. One such approach that is gathering support is the so-
called ‘bridge’ proposal (see also Diwan et al., 2024). Under this approach, countries 
would prepare and implement sound, bankable projects and enact strong policy and 
regulatory reforms to ensure high financial and economic rates of return. International 
financial institutions would provide scaled-up access to affordable, long-term finance to 
support such proposals and would mobilise private finance where appropriate. The 
approach would require a strengthening of the MDBs, a process that is underway based on 
a series of recommendations and Roadmap of reform endorsed by the G20.  
Higher levels of project finance will, however, leave a country more exposed to 
liquidity risk in the event of a sudden shock. Automatic mechanisms to provide 
temporary debt relief in circumstances such as a large natural disaster, for example, are 
therefore valuable buffers to strengthen the approach. Encouragingly, state-contingent 
debt clauses are already being used more widely, including by multilateral financial 
institutions.  
Some countries may not have the capacity for a large scale-up of project 
identification and implementation. Where these countries also have crushing debt 
burdens, there is a need for an orderly resolution of the debt, to maintain political and 
social stability. The Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable has taken steps to shorten the time 
to resolve debt negotiations within the Common Framework for Debt Treatments, with 
some positive results so far. Expeditious support from the IMF, such as from the Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) and Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST) (see 
31 
 
Section 3.8), including measures to protect investment programmes from fiscal austerity, 
and access to International Development Association (IDA) and other concessional 
resources, are important elements of the financing solutions to restore debt sustainability 
in some low-income countries.  
It is also essential to tackle the vicious cycle between climate and debt vulnerability, 
particularly in low-income countries. Streamlining the G20 Common Framework for debt 
treatments (CF) will make debt restructuring easier for countries that need it. Bilateral 
donors and IFIs could scale up concessional financing to enable climate-vulnerable 
countries to invest in adaptation, offset loss and damage, and restore nature loss. 
Innovative solutions to provide debt relief and release fiscal space, beyond the 
restructuring process, provide additional support. Debt to support high-growth 
investments can improve creditworthiness over time and should be built into fiscally 
responsible IMF programmes. The IMF could also provide enhanced financial safety nets to 
climate-vulnerable countries.  
Finally, Debt Sustainability Assessments (DSAs) will need to consider how climate 
affects financial risks – the potential for damage as well as the returns from adaptation 
investments that improve future opportunities and growth prospects for developing 
countries. Climate risks span physical and transition risks. Investing in climate action 
enables economic transformation, reduces the impact of climate risks and generates 
savings from reduced loss and damage and restoration of natural capital. Extending DSAs 
to cover longer-term scenarios could better reflect these growth multipliers. DSAs can then 
highlight the value of mobilising affordable finance, which will require international 
support, to better assist an investment push consistent with achieving long-term fiscal 
sustainability.  
3.4. The imperative to boost domestic resource mobilisation 
While a very large proportion of climate finance will be from the private sector, public 
domestic resource mobilisation (DRM) will be foundational. More than one-third of the 
incremental financing for climate action in EMDCs (other than China) is expected to come 
from public DRM. The World Bank (2023a) estimates that an additional 2.7 percentage 
points of GDP will need to be mobilised domestically to meet the required level of climate 
financing by 2030: this would create significant fiscal space to boost investment in climate 
action. To do so will require tapping the significant scope for DRM through taxation and 
public spending reforms, making greater use of carbon pricing and more effective 
international tax cooperation to contain tax base erosion and profit-shifting. 
Increasing tax revenues must be the central pillar of DRM, and there is major scope to 
raise tax revenues in many EMDCs. The IMF (2024) estimates that developing countries 
have an average tax gap of 9% of GDP, so that intensified domestic taxation reforms 
would have a high upside potential. Common measures include broadening tax bases, 
improving the progressivity of taxation, and raising tax compliance through administrative 
reforms and digitalisation of tax and customs administration. In addition, more should be 
done to improve the efficiency of public spending management. In this context, the IMF 
and World Bank Group (2024) jointly launched an initiative to provide systemic capacity-
building support to developing countries to strengthen tax capacity and improve public 
expenditure management. 
Carbon pricing provides tremendous potential to raise revenues during the transition 
while efficiently providing incentives to reduce emissions. Its implementation will require 
addressing distributional concerns, however. Explicit carbon taxes and emissions trading 
systems (ETS) are the two most common forms of carbon pricing. Between 2015 and 2023, 
their coverage of global greenhouse gas emissions doubled to 23%, and the average price 
32 
 
across carbon pricing instruments increased from $7 to $20 per tonne, but coverage and 
prices vary widely across jurisdictions. There is significant scope for countries to improve 
the coverage and price of carbon pricing instruments to address climate change. Carbon 
pricing can generate potentially high revenues: middle-income countries can raise 
revenues of 0.5–1.5% of GDP with a $50 carbon price and low-income/lower-middle-
income countries revenues can raise around 1–1.5% of GDP with a $25 carbon price (IMF, 
2024). Globally, potential annual revenue would be around $1.4 trillion by 2030. 
In addition, the elimination of harmful subsidies has huge payoffs in reducing 
environmental damage and mobilising public revenues. The IMF estimates that fossil 
fuel subsidies amounted to 7% of global GDP in 2022 (Black et al., 2023). The World Bank 
also documents the high levels of environmentally harmful subsidies to the fisheries and 
agricultural sectors. Phasing out harmful subsidies should be pursued, but this will have to 
be accompanied by compensation and social protection measures for vulnerable groups 
affected by increased energy prices and loss of subsidies. 
All of these measures will require strong international tax cooperation. Cooperating on 
tax measures globally will also need to give greater consideration to raising the revenues 
accruing to developing countries, which have so far been relatively modest. Recent 
initiatives led by the OECD on country-by-country reporting and automatic exchange of 
information, and the introduction of the global minimum tax of 15%, are significant efforts 
to tax multinationals more effectively and have led to the decline of offshore tax evasion 
and profit-shifting. More could be done, however, to improve their revenue-raising 
potential for developing countries, including through increasing the global minimum tax. 
Ongoing discussion topics at the G20 include globally coordinated taxation of the super-
rich (G20, 2024). If implemented, revenue-sharing agreements will be needed to support 
developing countries to achieve their climate and development objectives. The ongoing 
effort to put in place a UN Tax Convention (UN, 2024) promises to provide a forum in 
which greater consideration can be given to enhancing the revenues that could accrue to 
developing countries.  
3.5. Creating a new highway for private finance and tackling the cost  
of capital 
Reducing the cost of capital 
The cost of capital is significantly higher in EMDCs than in advanced economies. In 
2022, in a sample of countries, the weighted cost of capital for solar PV investments, for 
example, was at least twice as high in EMDCs (other than China), averaging 9–12% 
compared with 5–6% in advanced economies (IEA, 2024c). Economy-wide estimates of 
the cost of capital show similar magnitudes of difference between advanced economies 
and EMDCs. For some low-income countries the cost of capital can be five times that of 
advanced economies.  
The cost of capital is especially important for clean energy projects. These projects are 
generally capital-intensive and/or require significant upfront capital outlays; thus, the cost 
of capital is a key factor in these investments. Utility-scale solar and wind investments are 
very capital-intensive although they have low operating costs. Moreover, these 
investments are up to 75% debt-financed. Investments in transmission and distribution 
grids are also very capital-intensive. For independent power transmission projects in the 
form of public–private partnerships, the cost of capital can be of particular importance 
since the remuneration is fixed by the regulators. Battery storage is a third category of 
investment that is both highly capital-intensive and also highly leveraged. In fact, the cost 
of capital plays a very significant role in almost 40% of the investments in clean energy 
33 
 
needed in EMDCs during the next 10 years to achieve the IEA’s net zero emissions by 2050 
(NZE) scenario, and a relatively significant role in another 17% of the investments needed 
(IEA, 2024c).  
The higher risk premium in EMDCs reflects investors’ assessments of two broad sets of 
risks: the first is country-level or macroeconomic risks that apply to any investment in a 
particular jurisdiction, and the second is sector- or project-specific risks that are an add-on 
to any country-level risks. A 2023 survey undertaken by the IEA on investor concerns in 
investing in clean energy projects in a sample of EMDCs identified political, currency, 
regulatory, off-taker and transmission risks (the latter two types being sector-specific) as 
the five key elements that need to be addressed to reduce the cost of capital in EMDCs. 
Among these, macroeconomic risks, namely sovereign, political and currency risks, were 
stated most frequently as being the top three types of risk. A separate analysis that breaks 
down the required rate of return for equity and debt, and estimates a “climate investment 
rate risk premium” for solar projects in a wide sample of advanced economies and EMDCs, 
finds that the average required cost of debt is around 6% in advanced economies, 
compared with 21% in EMDCs, while the average required rate of return to equity is 12% in 
advanced economies and 27% in EMDCs (Gautam et al., 2023). The estimated “climate 
investment risk premium” averages only 4.6% in advanced economies, while in EMDCs the 
corresponding average is 15% (ibid.). 
Reducing the costs of capital will require a combination of measures at the 
international and country levels to reduce both actual and perceived risks. The 
provision, composition and structure of blended finance and other de-risking mechanisms 
will depend on factors such as the phase of project development, project scale, the 
maturity and nature of the technology, the level of capital market development and 
macroeconomic conditions and their attendant risks. At the same time, policies and 
measures are needed at the country level to strengthen the macroeconomic conditions 
and the investment climate, develop domestic capital markets and adopt appropriate 
regulatory and legal frameworks. By reducing the risk premium required by investors, these 
measures would help lower the cost of capital.  
Data- and information-sharing is another important element in reducing the cost of 
capital as investors’ perceived risks of investing in EMDCs are often higher than the 
actual realised risks of projects. Data-sharing by project operators on project 
performance, for instance, can help lower these perceived risks; so too can providing credit 
information (such as default and recovery rates) on sovereign, semi-sovereign and private 
loans in emerging markets (such as the information provided through the Global Emerging 
Markets Risk database [GEMs]). 
A lower cost of capital in EMDCs will be key to enabling the requisite climate 
investments and facilitating the global energy transition. The IEA has calculated that a 
1-percentage point reduction in the cost of capital would result in reducing average clean 
energy financing costs by $150 billion per year. In turn this reduction would represent a 10–
20% decrease in the cost of capital across sectors compared with current values. In part, 
this large impact is due to the large weight the cost of capital has on solar PV and wind 
energy production and the fact that these two sources of energy represent 15% of the 
investment needs in the NZE scenario. A 2-percentage point reduction could double this 
reduction to $300 billion.  
Mobilising private finance at scale 
Mobilising at least $1 trillion a year of private capital for climate action in EMDCs by 
2030 is a critical lever to drive global growth and sustainable development. Action to 
unlock this volume of private capital – both domestic and external – has gained 
34 
 
momentum in recent years, especially since COP26, and there are many good examples of 
progress. Climate and transition finance opportunities in EMDCs are becoming increasingly 
attractive to the private sector as technology tipping points reduce the cost of low-
carbon, nature-positive solutions and the scale of the opportunity becomes clearer. This  
is especially true in the power system. Over the next 10 years, EMDCs should account for 
over 60% of the absolute increase in clean energy, creating outsized opportunities for 
private finance.  
Despite growing momentum, volumes of private capital flowing to EMDCs are still far 
too low: the challenge is one of both speed and scale. In 2021–22, only $15 billion of 
international private investment went to climate action in EMDCs, less than 5% of what is 
needed (Buchner et al., 2023). Rising interest rates in the large economies and a stronger 
dollar have also driven significant capital outflows from EMDC stocks and bonds in recent 
years, leading to low portfolio allocations from institutional investors. Where they are 
investing, it is often not in green: environment, social and governance (ESG)-focused 
funds allocate significantly fewer resources to EMDC assets, often comprising only 6% of 
their portfolios as these tend to have lower ESG scores (IMF, 2022). Meanwhile, less than 
1% of domestic private capital is invested in climate action due to a range of policy and 
capacity barriers. Increasing the breadth and depth of private capital is one of the most 
important, but hardest, actions for climate finance.   
These numbers are even poorer when disaggregating for Least Developed Countries 
(LDCs): private capital represents less than 10% of total climate finance in LDCs, 
compared with 50% for other EMDCs (Naran et al., 2024). Mobilisation rates in low-
income and lower-middle-income countries are also very low – in 2023 only $8 billion of 
direct private capital was mobilised out of total MDB lending of $75 billion. LDCs also 
accounted for less than 10% of private climate finance mobilised through official 
development finance interventions, compared with 57% for upper-middle-income 
countries and 34% for lower-middle-income countries (Taskin et al., 2024). For a majority 
of EMDCs – including LDCs – a lack of an investable pipeline, the high cost and limited 
availability of capital, low levels of financial sector development and regulatory barriers 
remain significant impediments to unlocking more private investment.  
Urgent, coordinated action is needed to tackle these impediments.  
Firstly, the public and private sector need to strengthen collaboration to develop 
sectoral investment plans and co-create project pipelines. The adoption of transition 
finance frameworks and NDC investment plans offers an opportunity to collaborate and 
tackle policy bottlenecks; they are an important way to signal investment opportunities 
and policy priorities to the private sector and give certainty around critical issues like 
planning, permitting and procurement. Country platforms are also a powerful way to 
engage investors around sectoral planning. With the early involvement of the private 
sector, country platforms have already helped update local content rules and prioritise grid 
finance solutions. Refreshing the institutional architecture for project preparation is also 
critical. Project preparation funding can typically leverage 20 to 50 times the initial 
investment and existing facilities should be scaled up urgently, alongside greater 
engagement with national and regional development banks which are important project 
originators. Accelerating partnerships between private and philanthropic organisations to 
take on some of the early development costs can also help increase the number of 
bankable climate deals which get to close.  
Secondly, scaling up and replicating more effective risk-sharing mechanisms and 
credit enhancement can help improve the availability and reduce the cost of capital in 
EMDCs. Addressing foreign exchange risk is particularly important to mobilise international 
capital for renewables where investment is typically in dollars but revenues are in local 
35 
 
currency. Expanding local currency lending can also help manage FX exposure. However, 
local currency offerings remain modest, representing less than 5% of total development 
finance, so scaling up affordable hedging solutions and other innovative mechanisms to 
manage currency risk remains crucial. Increasing the use of green guarantees and first loss 
equity can also help address investor risks (both macro and micro), providing the credit 
enhancement needed to unlock private capital for EMDC transactions; these are an 
important part of the toolkit to reduce the cost of capital. On average, guarantees 
mobilise five to six times more private finance than traditional loans, which explains why 
they have received growing attention in the climate space.  
The World Bank has committed to triple its guarantee capacity by increasing the size 
of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) to $20 billion by 2030. 
Furthermore, several new guarantee companies have been launched, many in local 
currency, which demonstrates the demand for catalytic instruments that can tackle 
certain macro risks, and the growing focus on mobilising domestic capital. These 
guarantees, along with other blended finance tools, should be targeted to mitigate 
specific risks across the investment lifecycle, from early-stage project development to the 
secondaries market. There has been some progress on ensuring that the treatment of risk-
sharing products (especially guarantees) is compliant with Basel III capital adequacy 
requirements and other regulations; this must be standardised to ensure these de-risking 
mechanisms provide the appropriate credit enhancement. Proposals to turn MDB A/B 
loans into a recognised asset class should also be explored. Standardising and scaling up 
insurance mechanisms can help unlock investment in adaptation projects, which usually 
generate savings rather than revenue and are chronically underfunded. 
It will also be important to take into account the lower risks associated with MDB 
lending and guarantees. At present, the de-risking effect of MDB guarantees is not taken 
into account by credit rating agencies as MDBs have a probability of default roughly three 
times lower than commercial lenders from the same borrowers (0.37% compared with 
1.13% for bank loans and 1.37% for sovereign bonds [Paris Pact for People and the Planet 
/4P, 2024]). Political momentum on this issue is growing, and in September 2023 16 heads 
of states committed in a joint 4P Leaders Communiqué to establish a roadmap and 
constructive dialogue with credit rating agencies, regulators, governments, investors and 
other relevant stakeholders to enhance the transparency and accuracy of credit ratings 
and country risks assessments. 4P is now establishing a coalition to implement this 
commitment.  
Along with the use of de-risking and credit enhancement mechanisms like first loss, 
liquidity facilities, guarantees and hedging, MDBs can play an outsized role in 
unlocking institutional capital by securitising assets off their balance sheets (originate-
to-share) and developing large-ticket, long-term, liquid/investment grade products in risk-
diversified portfolios for pension funds. Sharing the historical performance and default 
rates of these assets/portfolios can help demonstrate that the perceived risk of EMDCs is 
typically much higher than actual risk, reinforcing the importance of transparent, timely 
and shared data. More broadly, different blended finance instruments and approaches  
can play complementary roles in mobilising private finance towards climate action. In  
the context of the high adaptation financing needs, blended finance can be particularly 
promising in driving private finance towards key adaptation areas, based on the 
specificities of the respective sectors, and the financing and development context  
(OECD, 2024c). 
Thirdly, revamping the financial system can help create a virtuous cycle for private 
capital mobilisation in EMDCs. The most immediate priority is to shift domestic financial 
systems to support green investments, encouraging local banks to work in partnership 
36 
 
with MDBs and DFIs to unlock larger lending volumes, especially for renewables, and then 
develop the right financing structures to aggregate projects and access capital markets. 
Clean energy transitions require leadership from governments and state-owned enterprises 
to attract private capital that can complement public funding. Domestic banks should 
establish partnerships with international and development banks to significantly increase 
financing for renewable energy projects, looking at countries such as India for successful 
models to replicate. Increasing cross-border flows is also critical to achieving the scale of 
private finance needed. Altérra, the $30 billion catalytic climate finance vehicle launched 
by the UAE at COP28, can provide important insights on how to attract and deploy 
institutional capital for climate investments in emerging markets that are not able to 
attract such finance.  
Finally, tackling supply-side regulatory and incentive barriers to remove legal and 
organisational constraints to investing in EMDCs, especially for clean energy and 
green industrialisation, is another important way to unlock institutional capital for 
EMDCs. Reforming the policies of regulatory and rating agencies can help achieve 
consistency in capital treatment of transactions across jurisdictions, along with 
recognition of the risk-mitigating features of blended finance and other strategies such as 
A/B loan structures, updating prudential capital requirements for banks, insurance 
companies and pension funds to reflect the actual risk of investment in EMDCs, updating 
external ratings methodologies by adjusting subjective risk premiums assigned to EMDCs, 
and incorporating climate risk parameters into credit rating assessments. While supply-
side regulation like the prudential regime for insurance and reinsurance undertakings in the 
EU, Solvency II, is still a critical barrier to insurers, pension funds arguably do not have the 
same legal or fiduciary constraints. For instance, for infrastructure projects, Solvency II 
introduces a capital buffer for insurers of 25% for projects in OECD countries and of almost 
double that at 49% for non-OECD countries, but this is not a risked-based criterion and 
increases the cost of investments in non-OECD countries with a penalising effect (4P, 
2024). As part of the 4P Coalition on Realigning Real and Perceived Investment Risks, 4P is 
establishing an Eminent Group of Experts to review the impacts of prudential regulations 
on investments in developing countries, with a view to revising these regulations by the 
relevant bodies if necessary. Education and guidance on the interpretation of climate in 
fiduciary duty and the scale of the investment opportunities can address behavioural and 
cultural barriers to investing in EMDCs. Clear, forward-looking commitments from asset 
owners to EMDC portfolio allocations and climate finance deployment targets (aligned 
within their relevant risk frameworks and associated fiduciary and legal obligations and in 
adherence to their respective business models) would have an outsized impact across the 
whole market, giving asset managers and developers a runway to structure products that 
can absorb large-scale institutional allocations. 
3.6. An MDB system that works for climate action 
Multilateral development banks (MDBs) have been at the forefront of the expansion in 
international climate finance. MDBs’ climate finance commitments to low- and middle-
income countries increased from $41.5 billion in 2019 to $74.7 billion in 2023 (EIB, 2024). In 
addition, MDBs expanded their climate finance commitments to high-income countries 
from $20.1 billion in 2019 to $50.3 billion in 2023, mainly to Europe through the European 
Investment Bank. The World Bank has had the highest growth rate in climate finance, 
accounting for one-third of the scale-up in international climate finance and half of all 
climate finance from MDBs in 2023. Two-thirds of the climate finance from MDBs has been 
for mitigation and one-third for adaptation. 
37 
 
MDBs have also embarked on a coordinated programme of reform to implement the 
agenda of “better, bigger and more effective MDBs” (Heads of MDBs, 2024). Ten MDB 
Heads have set out their vision for what the MDBs should do, individually and collectively, 
under five areas: 1. scaling up MDB financing capacity; 2. boosting joint action on climate; 
3. strengthening country-level collaboration and co-financing; 4. catalysing private sector 
mobilisation; and 5. enhancing development effectiveness and impact (ibid.). These areas 
correspond closely with the vision laid out by the G20 Independent Expert Group to triple 
annual sustainable lending levels, add global public goods including climate to the 
mandate, co-create multi-year country platform programmes, bring engagement with the 
private sector to the centre, sharpen analytical support and speed up business processes 
for enhanced impact. The G20 Brazilian Presidency has developed a G20 Roadmap on 
MDB reform for approval by G20 Finance Ministers and Leaders (G20, 2024). The roadmap 
sets out a detailed blueprint and specific recommendations on how the MDBs can 
implement the vision of better, bigger and more effective MDBs. The shared understanding 
on this agenda will be invaluable in giving impetus to reform and tracking progress.  
While all MDBs have made progress to implement the reform agenda, the pace and 
ambition fall short of what is needed. This is underscored by the October 2024 IEG 
Update (Mishra et al., 2024) and the latest update of the Center for Global Development’s 
MDB Reform Tracker shows that progress has been uneven across the MDBs (CGD, 2024). 
However, the Viewpoint Note of the MDB Heads records progress across MDBs on the 
reform agenda (Heads of MDBs, 2024). In our assessment, there are three areas where 
progress is not yet enough to produce transformative change: there has been a lack of 
systematic engagement on system reforms and scaling up investment at the country level, 
including through more proactive engagement in country platforms; insufficient expansion 
of lending capacity at the scale and pace needed; and insufficient catalysing of private 
finance, including through tapping long-term institutional capital, as discussed above. 
These efforts can be supported by rewiring MDBs from being just financiers to mobilisers 
and co-creators, driven by the integration of mobilisation and climate into mandates, 
incentive systems and targets (OECD, 2021). 
Much greater expansion in lending capacity will be needed to meet the investment 
goals to deliver on the Paris Agreement. Several MDBs have been making progress to 
implement recommendations made in the G20 Independent Review of Multilateral Banks’ 
Capital Adequacy Frameworks (G20 Expert Group on Capital Adequacy Framework, 2022), 
including lowering equity/debt leverage ratios and other measures to optimise balance 
sheets. Several are also exploring the use of guarantees and hybrid capital to boost lending 
capacity. While there has been some positive response, both options could be significantly 
expanded with support from shareholders and buy-in from investors such as sovereign 
wealth funds. This should be a priority for the coming year. New capital has been injected 
into the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and IDB Invest, the private 
sector arm of the Inter-American Development Bank. The International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development is receiving the last instalments of its 2018 capital 
package and has called for a shareholder review of its capital adequacy in 2025. The Asian 
Development Bank has approved capital management reforms to unlock $100 billion in 
new funding capacity over the next decade to address the region’s overlapping, 
simultaneous crises. Making capital contributions to the MDBs remains one of the most 
effective ways to expand climate finance at low cost and long maturities and provide the 
risk capital to catalyse private finance.  
MDBs should come forward with a commitment and plan to triple lending capacity by 
2030 as part of the NCQG. To date, identified measures have raised the lending 
headroom of the MDBs by $357 billion, implying an increase in sustainable lending of 
38 
 
approximately $30 billion per year, a 30% increase over 2019 levels (G20 IEG, 2024). This is 
far short of the tripling in sustainable annual lending levels by MDBs that is needed to 
deliver on the investment needed by developing countries. MDBs have a unique 
opportunity to support the clean energy revolution in developing countries and meet the 
urgent need for funding for climate resilience and natural capital. They can only do this 
with adequate and predictable long-term financing. All options therefore must be 
vigorously pursued, including proactive capital increases. Major shareholders must 
overcome their differences and give full support to the scale and urgency of the task. 
Beyond the MDBs, an integrated global network of public development banks (PDBs) 
through the Finance in Common Summit (FiCS) initiative, can be a powerful force for 
more coherent and effective support for climate action and finance. The FiCS coalition 
manages $23 trillion in assets and about $2.5 trillion in annual investments, more than 
10% of total investment flows. Given the ability of PDBs to develop and support 
investment and scale up and crowd in financing, they can play a central role in a global 
framework for sustainable investment. The last Summit in Cartagena in September 2023 
agreed on a work programme to align finance with the SDGs, Paris Agreement and Global 
Biodiversity Framework, further increase cooperation between all PDBs by deploying 
innovative tools, and mobilise and join forces with other willing stakeholders. 
3.7. Tapping the potential of carbon markets 
Carbon markets have an important potential role to play in financing the climate 
transition which is as yet largely untapped. Compliance markets through which firms 
pay government-mandated carbon pricing are central to the sovereign policy toolkit to 
provide incentives for the climate transition and raise public revenues. More countries are 
implementing carbon taxes and emissions trading systems, and these raised $100 billion in 
2022 (World Bank, 2023b). Yet, the average level of carbon pricing globally at $5 per tonne 
(across priced and unpriced emissions) is too low, and the coverage at 25% of global 
emissions too limited. More countries should expand compliance markets by 2030 to raise 
revenues, including for global climate finance.  
The voluntary carbon market (VCM) – which differs from compliance markets by 
trading verified emission reductions or removal – also has the potential to generate 
much-needed revenues for priority elements of the transition in EMDCs. Proceeds can 
be used to support a just transition around the world and initiatives to protect and restore 
nature, for which funding has not been readily available to date. Voluntary carbon credit 
markets raise additional financing for developing countries, as private companies and 
other actors seek to purchase carbon credits to align themselves with a 1.5°C pathway. 
The expansion of voluntary markets could potentially provide up to $50 billion in the 
medium term (to 2030) (TSVCM, 2021; Trove Research, 2021). 
However, the VCM has suffered from major setbacks and poor market sentiment. In 
2023 the voluntary market saw a significant drop in the market value of traded carbon 
credits, from $1.87 billion to $723 million (World Bank, 2024). Whether and how much the 
VCM grows will depend on the confidence in its integrity and the robustness of the 
governance architecture of the market. There have been important efforts to build market 
credibility, but bolstering market trust and confidence has been difficult, in part because 
of the uncertain regulatory landscape. This includes the slow negotiation and 
implementation of the mechanisms created by Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Efforts to 
improve methodologies and safeguards will lead to better alignment with the Paris 
Agreement and promote greater interoperability with public oversight of carbon markets.  
The consensus reached on the standards for Article 6.4 and a mechanism to update 
them was a welcome early development at COP29. The endorsement by the COP of the 
39 
 
recommendations put forth by the Supervisory Body will pave the way for fully 
operationalising Article 6 and for global standards to underpin key elements of a robust 
architecture for market integrity.   
Further steps are being undertaken to provide greater assurance of credit integrity. 
The Integrity Council for the Voluntary Carbon Market (ICVCM) introduced a Core Carbon 
Principles Framework in 2023. Having made its first set of assessments of credits eligible 
using this framework, the ICVCM is currently in the process of strengthening the 
framework to provide clear and comprehensive guidance to promote good understanding 
among market players of the quality of the credits assessed. These efforts, along with the 
consensus reached on Article 6, will facilitate convergence to a stronger architecture to 
build credit integrity. 
Clear and operational guidelines for the use of carbon credits by buyers in their 
decarbonisation strategies is core to the integrity architecture. At this time, companies 
that have met the criteria established by the Voluntary Carbon Markets Integrity Initiative 
(VCMI) have not been able to use the carbon credits. The VCMI is currently going through 
an important public consultation process to finalise its framework for high-integrity 
demand, including outlining the role of carbon credits in compensating for part of Scope 3 
emissions that allows the pricing of emissions that might otherwise not be covered by  
such policy, enabling investment in critical climate-positive activities. Additionally,  
public authorities can take supportive regulatory actions to boost demand for high 
integrity credits. 
Advanced economies can also work together to develop regulations that support high 
quality carbon credits and boost voluntary demand. They could increase finance to 
EMDCs by promoting integration between compliance and carbon credit markets. This will 
require monitoring and reporting systems on both the demand and supply sides, including 
interoperable carbon registers, to implement such integration. 
Finally, enabling EMDCs to develop and manage their use of carbon markets is an 
additional pillar in the pursuit of greater integrity and scale of carbon credit markets. 
EMDCs must develop a pipeline of projects that can generate high-quality credits and 
ensure that these issuances align with their climate commitments and development plans. 
They will need to build institutional capacity, including to integrate the use of carbon 
credits into their NDCs, build capacity for monitoring, reporting and verification of 
emissions reductions, track issued credits in registries that are interoperable with global 
registries, define who will obtain legal rights in key sectors, with due regard to the laws of 
local communities, set social and environmental standards, and signal to buyers their 
strong expectations for high levels of market integrity. International technical and 
financial support for EMDCs will be required to address the institutional challenge of 
building carbon markets and tap the potential of compliance and voluntary markets. 
Development financial institutions such as the World Bank and other MDBs can play an 
important supportive role.  
3.8. Delivering and expanding options for concessional finance 
An inclusive architecture for climate finance will require access to concessional and 
debt-free financing for investments in priority needs to address climate change in 
EMDCs – from adaptation and resilience-building to addressing loss and damage, restoring 
nature and supporting a just transition. Many of these investments do not yield the 
revenue streams necessary to attract private financing and in some instances they can 
only be supported by highly concessional finance. Concessional financing of $200–300 
billion annually will be needed by 2030. Delayed action and worsening climate impacts are 
only widening this financing gap.  
40 
 
Mobilising the concessional financing needed can only be delivered by tapping all 
available pools of concessional finance, including innovative options. More ambitious 
contributions from advanced economies will be foundational to raising significant levels of 
predictable concessional climate financing but will not be sufficient. Other options should 
be explored, such as expanding the voluntary rechannelling of special drawing rights 
(SDRs), scaling up private philanthropy, and introducing international taxation of high-
emitting sectors.  
Bilateral contributions from advanced economy partners may be a small component 
of total climate financing but they are critical to fostering trust, meeting urgent 
needs and leveraging other sources of finance. Bilateral contributions from advanced 
economy partners grew from an average of $32 billion in 2019–20 to $43 billion in 2022 
(OECD, 2024a), but more should be done to increase their scale. We calculate that 
bilateral finance should double by 2030 and triple by 2035. Grant financing, which 
amounted to $25.6 billion in 2022, should more than double by 2030. The quality of 
financing should be improved by doubling financing for adaptation immediately and 
through measures to enhance transparency and ease access to financing.  
Critical to supporting climate action in low-income and climate-vulnerable countries 
will be securing an ambitious IDA21 – the forthcoming 21st replenishment process of the 
International Development Association. More than 40% of IDA’s annual lending supports 
climate action. Donor contributions to the 21st replenishment, which concludes in 
December 2024, must be increased to at least $28–30 billion, which will only enable IDA 
lending of $100 billion.  
Multilateral climate funds play an important catalytic role in advancing systemic 
change through partnerships with MDBs, mobilising financing aligned with the Paris 
Agreement, and building markets. Enhancing their financing capacity, which now stands 
at $4–5 billion of commitment annually, will build on their strengths which is essential 
given the scarcity of concessional financing. The recently completed report by the 
Independent High-Level Expert Group to review the vertical climate and environmental 
funds, mandated by the G20, recommended building on work to date to enhance 
efficiency, including in accreditation processes, project approval times, and accelerated 
disbursements (G20 IHLEG, 2024). Other notable recommendations include collaborating 
to harmonise procedures, working together to leverage existing sources of public and 
private financing, and working as a system in support of country-led investment 
platforms.  
There is great urgency to secure adequate funding for the Fund for Responding to Loss 
and Damage. Advanced economies must take the lead in mobilising the necessary 
financing for the Fund, which was operationalised at COP28. Nineteen nations have 
pledged a combined total of $792 million, including a $100 million contribution from the 
UAE. While this is a first step, it is less than 0.3% of the expected loss and damage costs 
by 2030.  
Following the historic SDR allocation of $650 billion in 2021, the delivery of the G7’s 
pledge to voluntarily rechannel $100 billion of SDRs to countries in need of financing 
has been a welcome development. The IMF’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) 
and the Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST) are currently the lending vehicles for the 
rechannelled SDRs. The PRGT has now received $56 billion of SDRs to provide liquidity 
support to low-income countries, and the RST $49 billion. While the US and Germany were 
unable to rechannel SDRs, they have notably found alternative means to contribute 
financing.  
41 
 
The IMF will need to address impediments to accelerating RST lending given the strong 
demand. The RST has now committed about $10 billion, about one-third of its loan 
resources by September 2024, and $3 billion has been disbursed. To continue its growth 
over the longer term, it will need to expand its access limits, simplify requirements, and 
reduce the high cost of rechannelling SDRs.  
Rechannelling SDRs through MDBs can potentially be a significant means to expand 
the lending of MDBs, and it is important to tackle remaining obstacles. The Executive 
Board of the IMF reached a decision in May 2024 to authorise its member countries to use 
SDRs to acquire hybrid capital issued by prescribed SDR holders, though only after 
protracted discussions. Despite this approval, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and 
InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB) have not yet been able to implement their joint 
hybrid capital initiative in the absence of the critical mass of SDR providers that need to 
participate in the liquidity support arrangement necessary to preserve the reserve asset 
character of the SDR. Additionally, increasing the volume of SDRs rechannelled through 
MDBs is constrained by the stance of the European Central Bank, which precludes the 
participation of EU countries, which hold many SDRs, in this rechannelling.  
The G20 and the IMF should explore how to tap the substantial potential for voluntary 
rechannelling from the existing pool of SDRs and agree on the regular issuance of 
SDRs. The IMF and member countries should take steps to improve the effectiveness of 
SDR rechannelling by modernising the framework for the use of SDRs, including the 
preservation of their reserve asset characteristic, to make it less rigid and costly. The IMF 
and the G20 should also initiate discussions on the next cycle of SDR issuance as part of a 
regular system to boost global liquidity in response to macro-critical shocks.  
There is scope for private philanthropy to further augment the scale of financing and 
leverage its strengths. Philanthropy can use its financing strengths to support country-led 
climate and development progress, and support activities where concessional finance is 
critically needed. It can build partnerships with MDBs, including through subscribing to 
their new hybrid capital and/or systematically co-financing activities by supporting 
capacity-building, research, and bringing down the cost of capital for investments. There 
is also scope for enhancing the role of corporate responsibility in increasing concessional 
financing in areas that typically need but do not receive adequate levels of grant 
financing.  
The efforts above, however, will not be sufficient to fill the concessional financing gap, 
and innovative solutions need to be actively pursued – such as international taxation 
of high-emitting sectors. This form of taxation has the potential to raise significant 
amounts of revenue that could be used to fill the climate financing gap (Macron et al., 
2024). International aviation and shipping have largely escaped taxation to address their 
environmental impacts and corporate taxation: redressing this situation could generate as 
much as $200 billion a year by 2035 (Black et al., 2024), which would make a huge 
contribution to global climate finance. Taxing emissions from these sectors would also 
induce much-needed decarbonisation: international aviation and shipping contribute 1.5% 
and 2% of global CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion, respectively, which will rapidly 
increase under a business-as-usual scenario. Similarly, the global taxation of fossil fuel 
consumption and production would yield large revenues and strong incentives to 
decarbonise. A fee of $5/tCO2e on the extraction of fossil fuels in 2024 would generate an 
estimated $216.2 billion per year (Sharma and Hillman, 2024). There have been calls to 
introduce these tax measures from coalitions of countries, including through the 
Bridgetown Agenda, Paris Global Financing Pact and Africa Climate Summit. As part of a 
package of initiatives for COP29, Azerbaijan recently announced the Climate Finance 
Action Fund to invest in climate action in developing countries. Financing for the Fund will 
42 
 
come from annual contributions from fossil fuel producing countries and companies, and 
Azerbaijan will be a founding contributor.  
At COP28, France, Kenya, Barbados, Antigua and Barbuda and Spain jointly launched 
a Global Solidarity Levies Task Force to explore new avenues for international taxation 
to finance climate action and sustainable development. The Task Force is examining 
feasible options across a range of options including the taxation of international shipping 
and aviation, fossil fuel levies and a financial transactions tax (FTT). Several of these 
measures embody the ‘polluter pay principle’, whereby levies or taxes are imposed on 
presently untaxed or under-taxed international carbon-polluting activities and the 
revenues can compensate the climate-vulnerable. Other options such as the FTT could 
provide opportunities to generate large revenues with little negative market impact. A 
0.1% rate on stocks and bonds instruments and a 0.01% rate on transactions of derivatives 
globally would generate an estimated $237.9–418.8 billion per year, depending on the  
level of market reaction and evasion (Pekanov and Schratzenstaller, 2019). The Task  
Force is conducting discussions to expand the coalition of willing countries that will support 
this effort. 
 
  
43 
 
4. Tracking and monitoring the delivery of the 
action agenda 
As the climate finance agenda shifts from outlining the need and pathways for 
climate finance into delivery, tracking and monitoring systems are critical to 
accelerating implementation. Tracking and monitoring foster accountability across the 
climate finance agenda by both shining a spotlight where progress is being made and 
highlighting gaps and opportunities to aid prioritisation of future actions. The tracking of 
climate finance has historically focused on tracking flows but given the time-sensitive 
nature of climate change and the emergence of major reform agendas, the tracking of 
actors and actions has also gained momentum. 
Long-standing climate finance flow trackers include: the UNFCCC’s biennial 
assessment of flows prepared by the Standing Committee on Finance; the OECD’s tracking 
of the delivery of the US$ 100 billion commitment, which publishes updates to inform the 
UNFCCC’s COP deliberations; the CPI Global Landscape on Climate Finance; and the IEA 
World Energy Investment. More recently, the ONE Campaign published its ‘Trillions 
Tracker’, which tracks the total public spending gap to finance the transition.5  
Issues associated with the measurement and transparency of climate finance remain. 
Tracking of climate finance continues to be hampered by a lack of consensus on what 
constitutes climate finance and a dearth of robust data, especially on domestic and 
private climate finance. However, recent OECD analysis (2024b) can serve as a starting 
point to better understand how support for climate is interlinked with development 
finance, and how the different yet interlinked underlying data is being reported.  
Systematic measurement mechanisms for tracking the action agenda on climate 
finance have historically been lacking. However, some are beginning to emerge, 
including CPI’s Climate Finance Reform Compass,6 which assesses implementation across 
the climate finance landscape, as framed by the COP28 Global Climate Finance 
Framework. The Compass outlines the required milestones for reform which together could 
drive the required increases to climate finance. The IHLEG’s forthcoming action agenda 
will complement the Compass, outlining critical actions to COP30, underpinned by a 
‘State of Delivery’ assessment across the six pillars of the IHLEG framework to be launched 
at COP29. This work is being taken forward in stages, as better information on key 
elements and indicators becomes available. Other more specific trackers are also being 
developed, including the Center for Global Development’s MDB Reform Tracker7 and the 
Paris Pact for People and the Planet’s (4P) report assessing delivery (4P, 2023). 
  
 
5 See https://unfccc.int/topics/climate-finance/resources/biennial-assessment-and-overview-of-
climate-finance-flows; www.oecd.org/en/topics/sub-issues/climate-finance-and-the-usd-100-
billion-goal.html; www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/global-landscape-of-climate-finance-
2023/; www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-investment-2024; and 
https://data.one.org/trillionstracker/ respectively. 
6 www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/climate-finance-reform-compass/  
7 www.cgdev.org/media/mdb-reform-tracker  
44 
 
References 
4P (2023) Implementation of the Paris Pact for People and the Planet. 
https://pactedeparis.org/pdf/Bilan_4P_COP28_ENG_VF.pdf  
Alberti C (2024) The cost of inaction. Climate Policy Initiative (CPI). 
https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/the-cost-of-inaction  
Armstrong McKay DI, Staal A, Abrams JF, Winkelmann R, Sakschewski B, Loriani S, et al. (2022) 
Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points. Science 
(American Association for the Advancement of Science), 377(6611). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn7950  
Black S, Parry I, Singh S, Vernon N (2024) Destination Net Zero: The Urgent Need for Global Carbon 
Tax in Aviation and Shipping. IMF Staff Climate Notes 2024/003. 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/staff-climate-notes/Issues/2024/10/01/Destination-
Net-Zero-The-Urgent-Need-for-a-Global-Carbon-Tax-on-Aviation-and-Shipping-555090 
Black S, Liu A, Parry I, Vernon N (2023) IMF Fossil Fuel Subsidies Data: 2023 Update. Working paper, 
IMF, Washington, DC. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2023/08/22/IMF-
Fossil-Fuel-Subsidies-Data-2023-Update-537281  
Blended Finance Taskforce and Centre for Sustainability Transitions (2022) Making Climate Capital 
work: Unlocking $8.5bn for South Africa’s Just Energy Transition. 
https://www.blendedfinance.earth/making-climate-capital-work  
Buchner B, Naran B, Padmanabhi R, Stout S, Strinati C, et al. (2023) Global Landscape of Climate 
Finance 2023. Climate Policy Initiative. 
https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/global-landscape-of-climate-finance-
2023/ 
Center for Global Development (2024) Multilateral Development Bank Reform Tracker. 
https://www.cgdev.org/media/mdb-reform-tracker  
Diwan I, Kessler M, Songwe V (2024) A bridge to climate action: A Tripartite deal for times of 
illiquidity. Policy Note 14. Finance for Development Lab. 
Gautam K, Purkayastha D, Widge V (2023) Cost of Capital for Renewable Energy Investments in 
Developing Economies. Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) 
https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/cost-of-capital-for-renewable-energy-
investments-in-developing-economies/  
Energy Transitions Commission [ETC] (2024) Credible Contributions: Bolder Plans for Higher Climate 
Ambition in the Next Round of NDCs. Version 1. Insights Briefing. https://www.energy-
transitions.org/publications/credible-contributions-bolder-plans-for-ndcs/#download-form  
European Investment Bank [EIB] (2024) 2023 Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ 
Climate Finance.  
Ghosh J (2021) Gender concerns in debt relief. IIED, London. http://pubs.iied.org/20691IIED  
Global Commission on Adaptation [GCA] (2021) Adapt Now: A global call for leadership on climate 
resilience. https://gca.org/reports/adapt-now-a-global-call-for-leadership-on-climate-
resilience/  
Griscom BW, Adams J, Ellis PW, Houghton RA, Lomax G, et al. (2017) Natural climate solutions. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - PNAS, 114(44): 11645–11650. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1710465114 
G20 (2024) G20 Roadmap Towards Better, Bigger And More Effective MDBs. 4th Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors (FMCBG) Meeting. https://www.g20.org/pt-br/sobre-o-
g20/trilhas/trilha-de-financas/arquitetura-financeira-internacional/7-g20-roadmap-
towards-better-bigger-and-more-effective-mdbs.pdf/@@download/file  
45 
 
G20 Expert Group on Capital Adequacy Framework (2022) Boosting MDBs’ investing capacity: an 
Independent Review of Multilateral Development Banks’ Capital Adequacy Frameworks. 
https://www.dt.mef.gov.it/export/sites/sitodt/modules/documenti_it/news/news/CAF-
Review-Report.pdf  
G20 Independent Expert Group [IEG] (2024) The G20 Independent Expert Group Report Card On 
Strengthening Multilateral Development Banks: An Incomplete Grade. 
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/2024-10/IEG-report-triple-agenda-report-card-
oct2024.pdf  
G20 IHLEG (2024) Accelerating Sustainable Finance for Emerging Markets and Developing 
Economies: Independent Review of the Vertical Climate and Environmental Funds. G20 
Independent High-Level Expert Group. https://g20sfwg.org/wp-
content/uploads/2024/10/G20-IHLEG-VCEF-Review.pdf  
G20 TF-CLIMA Group of Experts (2024) A Green and Just Planet: The 1.5°C Agenda for Governing 
Global Industrial and Financial Policies in the G20. Independent Report of the G20 TF-CLIMA 
Group of Experts. https://www.g20.org/en/tracks/sherpa-track/climate-change/the-g20-
taskforce-on-a-global-mobilization-against-climate-change-tf-clima/independent-report-
tfclima-group-of-experts.pdf  
Hallegatte S, Rentschler J, Rozenberg J (2019) Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure 
Opportunity. Sustainable Infrastructure. Washington, DC: World 
Bank. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/31805  
Heads of MDBs (2024) Viewpoint Note: MDBs Working as a System for Impact and Scale.  
Independent Expert Group on Debt, Nature and Climate (2024) Tackling the Vicious Circle. Interim 
Report of the Expert Review on Debt, Nature and Climate. 
https://d1leqfwiwfltz5.cloudfront.net/documents/Tackling_the_Vicious_Circle.pdf  
International Energy Agency [IEA] (2024a) World Energy Investment 2024. IEA, Paris. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-investment-2024 
IEA (2024b) World Energy Outlook 2024. IEA, Paris. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
outlook-2024 
IEA (2024c) Reducing the Cost of Capital. IEA, Paris. https://www.iea.org/reports/reducing-the-
cost-of-capital 
IEA (2023) World Energy Investment 2023. IEA, Paris. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
investment-2023 
International Monetary Fund (2024) G20 Note on Alternative Options for Revenue Mobilization. 
https://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/2024/062424.pdf 
International Monetary Fund (2022) Global Financial Stability Report—Navigating the High-Inflation 
Environment. Washington, DC, October. 
International Monetary Fund and World Bank (2024) Stepping Up Domestic Resource Mobilization: 
A new Joint Initiative for the IMF and the World Bank. https://www.imf.org/-
/media/Files/Research/imf-and-g20/2024/domestic-resource-mobilization.ashx  
International Institute for Sustainable Development and Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development [IISD and OECD] (2024) Fossil fuel subsidy tracker. 
https://fossilfuelsubsidytracker.org/ 
International Renewable Energy Agency [IRENA] (2024a) A just and inclusive energy transition in 
emerging markets and developing economies: Energy planning, financing, sustainable fuels 
and social dimensions. IRENA, Abu Dhabi. 
IRENA (2024b) Renewable power generation costs in 2023. IRENA, Abu Dhabi. 
IRENA and African Development Bank [IRENA and AfDB] (2022) Renewable Energy Market Analysis: 
Africa and Its Regions. International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, and African 
Development Bank, Abidjan. 
46 
 
Ishii N, Al-Mubarak R, Songwe V, Léautier F, Pangestu M, Teixeira I (2023) Financing nature: a 
transformative action agenda. Center for Global Commons. 
Kharas H, Rivard C (2024) Unpacking developing country debt problems: Selected reforms to the 
international financial architecture. Working Paper 186. Center for Sustainable 
Development, Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2024/04/Unpacking-developing-country-debt-service-problems.pdf 
Kharas H, Rivard C (2022) Debt, Creditworthiness, and Climate: A New Development Dilemma. 
Brookings Institution Working Paper. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2022/12/Debt-creditworthiness-and-climate-1.pdf 
Koplow D, Steenblik R (2024) Protecting Nature by Reforming Environmentally Harmful Subsidies: 
An Update. Earth Track. 
https://www.earthtrack.net/sites/default/files/documents/ehs_report_september-2024-
update_final.pdf  
Lankes HP, Macquarie R, Soubeyran E, Stern N (2023) The Relationship between Climate Action and 
Poverty Reduction. The World Bank Research Observer, 39(1): 1–46, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/wbro/lkad011 
Macron E, Mottley M, Ruto W (2024) The Case for Solidarity Levies. Project Syndicate. 
Mawejje J (2024) Fiscal Vulnerabilities in Low-Income Countries: Evolution, Drivers, and Policies. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Mishra D, Goyal T, Puri H (2024) MDB Reforms in the Slow Lane: Findings from a Global Survey of 
Experts, 2024. Delhi: Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations 
(ICRIER). 
Munich RE (2024) Natural disaster risks: Rising trend in losses. 
https://www.munichre.com/en/risks/natural-disasters.html  
Naran B, Buchner B, Price M, Stout S, Taylor M, Zabeida D (2024) Global Landscape of Climate 
Finance 2024: Insights for COP29. Climate Policy Initiative (CPI). 
New Climate Economy [NCE] (2018) Unlocking the Inclusive Growth Story of the 21st Century: 
Accelerating Climate Action in Urgent Times. Global Commission on the Economy and 
Climate. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD] (2024a) Climate Finance 
Provided and Mobilised by Developed Countries in 2013-2022, Climate Finance and the USD 
100 Billion Goal. OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/19150727-en 
OECD (2024b) Climate-related Development Finance (dataset), https://webfs.oecd.org/climate/  
OECD (2024c) Development Co-operation Report 2024: Tackling Poverty and Inequalities through 
the Green Transition. OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/357b63f7-en. 
OECD (2021) Financing the Climate Transition: The Role of Development Banks, Development 
Finance Institutions and their Shareholders. OECD Development Co-operation Policy Papers. 
OECD Publishing, Paris.   
Pekanov A, Schratzenstaller M (2019) A Global Financial Transaction Tax—Theory, Practice and 
Potential Revenues. Österreichisches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung working paper. 
Richards JA, Schalatek L, Achampong L, White H (2023) The Loss and Damage Finance Landscape: 
A discussion paper for the Loss and Damage community on the questions to be resolved in 
2023 for ambitious progress on the Loss and Damage Fund. Heinrich Böll Stiftung. 
https://us.boell.org/sites/default/files/2023-
05/the_loss_and_damage_finance_landscape_hbf_ldc_15052023.pdf 
Romanello M, Walawender M, Hsu S-C, Moskeland A, Palmeiro-Silva Y, Scamman D, et al. 
(2024) The 2024 report of the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: facing 
record-breaking threats from delayed action. 
47 
 
Seema N, Seyyed FJ, Shehzad CT (2021) Impact of gender on access to finance in developing 
countries. Applied Economics, 53(57): 6582–6610. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00036846.2021.1947958  
Semieniuk G, Holden PB, Mercure J-F, Salas P, Pollitt H, Jobson K, et al. (2022) Stranded fossil-fuel 
assets translate to major losses for investors in advanced economies. Nature Climate 
Change, 12(6), 532–538. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01356-y  
Sharma S, Hillman D (2024) The Climate Damages Tax: A guide to what it is and how it works. 
Stamp Out Poverty. 
Singh V, Bond K (2024) Powering up the Global South: The cleantech path to growth. RMI. 
https://rmi.org/wp-
content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2024/10/Powering_up_the_global_south.pdf  
Songwe V, Stern N, Bhattacharya A (2022) Finance for climate action: Scaling up investment for 
climate and development. Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the 
Environment, London School of Economics and Political Science. 
https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/finance-for-climate-action-scaling-
up-investment-for-climate-and-development/  
Statista (2024) Global fertilizer market size in 2020 and 2021, with a forecast for 2030. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1266004/global-fertilizer-market-size/  
Strinati C, Alberti C, Melling B, Baudry C (2024) Top-down Climate Finance Needs. Climate Policy 
Initiative (CPI). https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/top-down-climate-
finance-needs/  
Taskin Ö, Fortemps M, Sedemund S (2024) Private climate finance mobilised for developing 
countries through official development finance interventions: 2016 to 2022. OECD 
Development Co-operation Working Papers, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
Trove Research (2021) Future Size of the Voluntary Carbon Market. https://trove-
research.com/report/future-size-of-the-voluntary-carbon-market 
TSVCM [Taskforce on Scaling Voluntary Carbon Markets] (2021) Final Report. Institute for 
International Finance. https://www.iif.com/tsvcm 
United Nations (2024) The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024. 
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2024/The-Sustainable-Development-Goals-Report-
2024.pdf  
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa [UNECA] (2024) Economic Report on Africa 2024: 
Investing in a just and sustainable transition in Africa. 
https://repository.uneca.org/handle/10855/50162  
United Nations Environment Programme [UNEP] (2024a) Emissions Gap Report 2024: No more hot 
air … please! With a massive gap between rhetoric and reality, countries draft new climate 
commitments. Nairobi. https://doi.org/10.59117/20.500.11822/46404  
UNEP (2024b) Adaptation Gap Report 2024: Come hell and high water — As fires and floods hit the 
poor hardest, it is time for the world to step up adaptation actions. Nairobi. 
https://doi.org/10.59117 /20.500.11822/46497  
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Standing Committee on Finance 
[UNFCCC SCF] (2024) Second report on the determination of the needs of developing 
country parties related to implementing the convention and the Paris Agreement. Annex 1, 
unedited version. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/ 
2ndNDR_ES_SCF35_unedited%20version_0.pdf    
Verdone M, Seidl A (2017) Time, space, place, and the Bonn Challenge global forest restoration 
target. Restoration Ecology, 25(6): 903–911. https://doi.org/10.1111/rec.12512  
48 
 
V20 (2022) Climate vulnerable economies loss report: economic losses attributable to climate 
change in V20 economies over the last two decades (2000-2019). https://www.v-
20.org/resources/publications/climate-vulnerable-economies-loss-report  
Walter D, Bond K, Lovins A, Speelman L, Gulli C, Butler-Sloss S (2024) The Incredible Inefficiency of 
the Fossil Energy System. RMI. https://rmi.org/the-incredible-inefficiency-of-the-fossil-
energy-system/     
World Bank (2024) State and Trends of Carbon Pricing: International Carbon Markets 2024. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/41544   
World Bank Group (2023a) The Big Push for Transformation through Climate and Development—
Recommendations of the High Level Advisory Group on Sustainable and Inclusive Recovery 
and Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank (2023b) State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2023. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/items/58f2a409-9bb7-4ee6-899d-be47835c838f   
Independent High-Level Expert Group on Climate Finance
Co-chairs
Members
Mr Jean-Paul Adam Mr Monktek Singh 
Ahluwahlia
Ms Sara Jane 
Ahmed
Dr Amal-Lee Amin Mr Christoph Bals
Dr Muhamad  
Chatib Basri
Dr Mohamed  
Farid Saleh
Dr Frannie Léautier
Dr Mattia Romani
Dr Barbara  
Buchner
Professor Richard 
Calland
Mr Alain Ebobissé Dr Omar El-Arini
Professor  
Naoko Ishii
Dr Ma Jun Mr Homi Kharas
Dr Mahmoud 
Mohieldin
Mr Joaquim Levy
 Mr Hamza Ali Malik
 Dr Hanan Morsy
 Professor Avinash 
Persaud 
Mr Frédéric Samama Mr Todd Stern Dr Josué Tanaka Dr Izabella Teixeira
Dr Vera Songwe
 Professor Lord 
Nicholas Stern
Mr Amar  
Bhattacharya
Secretariat
Ms Eléonore 
Soubeyran
49
Mr Daniel Titelman Ms Laurence Tubiana Ms Marilou Uy
Mr Nigel Topping
