R E | SHAPING POLICIES
FOR CREATIVITY
2026
We share, we act, we build
MONITORING FRAMEWORK OF THE 2005 CONVENTION
ON THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF THE DIVERSITY OF CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS
GUIDING  
PRINCIPLES
Ensure the sovereign right of States to adopt and implement policies 
to protect and promote the diversity of cultural expressions, 
based on informed, transparent and participatory processes 
and systems of governance
Facilitate equitable access, openness and balance in 
the flow of cultural goods and services as well as the free 
movement of artists and cultural professionals
Recognize the complementarity 
of economic and cultural aspects 
of sustainable development
Respect human rights and fundamental 
freedoms of expression, information 
and communication as a pre-requisite 
for the creation and distribution 
of diverse cultural expressions
GOALS SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE SYSTEMS 
OF GOVERNANCE FOR CULTURE
ACHIEVE A BALANCED FLOW OF 
CULTURAL GOODS AND SERVICES AND 
INCREASE THE MOBILITY OF ARTISTS 
AND CULTURAL PROFESSIONALS
INTEGRATE CULTURE IN 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
FRAMEWORKS
PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS 
AND FUNDAMENTAL 
FREEDOMS
2030 
SDGs
EXPECTED 
RESULTS
National policies and measures support creation, production, distribution 
and access with regard to diverse cultural activities, goods and services 
and strengthen informed, transparent and participatory systems 
of governance for culture
National policies and measures, including preferential 
treatment, facilitate a balanced flow of cultural goods and 
services and promote the mobility of artists and cultural 
professionals around the world
Sustainable development policies 
and international cooperation 
programmes integrate culture 
as a strategic dimension
International and national legislation 
related to human rights and 
fundamental freedoms is implemented 
and promotes gender equality 
and artistic freedom 
AREAS OF 
MONITORING
Cultural 
and creative 
sectors
Media 
diversity
Digital 
environment
Partnering 
with 
civil society
Mobility 
of artists 
and cultural 
professionals
Flow of 
cultural goods  
and services
Treaties 
and 
agreements
National 
sustainable 
development 
policies 
and plans
International 
cooperation 
for sustainable 
development
Gender 
equality
Artistic 
freedom
CORE INDICATORS
Policies and 
measures support 
the development of 
dynamic cultural and 
creative sectors
Policies and 
measures support 
diversity of 
the media 
Policies and 
measures support 
digital creativity, 
enterprises and 
markets
Measures strengthen 
the skills and 
capacities of 
civil society
Policies and 
measures support 
the outward and 
inward mobility of 
artists and cultural 
professionals
Policies and 
measures 
support balanced 
international flows 
of cultural goods 
and services
Trade and 
investment 
agreements refer 
to the Convention 
or implement 
its objectives
National sustainable 
development 
policies and plans 
include action lines 
to support diverse 
cultural expressions
Development 
cooperation 
strategies include 
action lines to 
support diverse 
cultural expressions
Policies and 
measures promote 
gender equality 
in the culture and 
media sectors 
Policies and measures 
promote and protect 
freedoms of creation 
and expression and 
participation in 
cultural life
Policy-making 
is informed and 
involves multiple 
public bodies
Policies and 
measures support 
diversity of content 
in the media
Policies and 
measures facilitate 
access to diverse 
cultural expressions 
in the digital 
environment
Civil society is 
involved in the 
implementation 
of the Convention 
at national and 
global levels
Operational 
programmes support 
the mobility of 
artists and cultural 
professionals, 
notably from 
developing countries
Information 
systems evaluate 
international flows 
of cultural goods 
and services
Other agreements, 
declarations, 
recommendations 
and resolutions refer 
to the Convention 
or implement 
its objectives
Policies and 
measures support 
equity in the 
distribution of 
cultural resources 
and inclusive access 
to such resources
Development 
cooperation 
programmes 
strengthen 
creative sectors in 
developing countries
Monitoring systems 
evaluate levels of 
representation, 
participation and 
access of women 
in the culture and 
media sectors
Policies and 
measures promote 
and protect the 
social and economic 
rights of artists and 
cultural professionals
ACTIONS
Strategic decisions of the governing bodies implemented      •      Awareness raised      •      Partnerships and networks established, strengthened and fostered      •      Public debates organized
 Information and data collected, analysed and shared      •      Policy analysis, benchmarking and monitoring ensured      •      Global reports produced
Capacities and skills reinforced      •      Technical assistance and policy advice provided      •      Projects financed

R E | SHAPING POLICIES
FOR CREATIVITY
2026
We share, we act, we build
Published in 2026  
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific  
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)  
7 , place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France
© UNESCO 2026
ISBN 978-92-3-100851-1 
http://doi.org/10.58337/DQDA4649
This publication is available in Open Access under the 
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users 
accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO 
Open Access Repository (https://www.unesco.org/en/
open-access/cc-sa). 
The images marked with an asterisk (*) in this publication 
do not fall under the abovementioned CC_BY_ SA license 
and may not be used or reproduced without the prior 
permission of the copyright holders. 
The designations employed and the presentation of 
material throughout this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication 
are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those 
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Cover photo: © Diana Ejaita*
Graphic design & cover design: Corinne Hayworth
Printed by UNESCO
This publication was supported by Sweden.
SHORT SUMMARY
The future of creativity stands at a critical juncture. Today, most countries have 
established public bodies with mandates and budgets for culture, yet public funding 
for culture accounts for less than 0.6% of GDP . While the global trade in cultural 
goods reached US$254 billion in 2023, it is mostly dominated by the Global North. 
Furthermore, development aid for culture accounts for just 0.15% of total aid. 
Digital transformation has fundamentally reshaped the creative landscape. 
Never has creative content been so abundant, nor the tools so widely accessible. 
Yet for many, stable employment and fair pay are out of reach. 
These technological shifts are widening existing digital divides. 
In developed countries, 67% of individuals hold essential 
digital skills as opposed to only 28% in developing 
contexts. At the same time, the proliferation of AI-
generated content, online harassment and censorship 
generate an increasingly hostile environment for 
creators, especially women, Indigenous Peoples and 
other vulnerable communities.
These challenges urgently call for collaborative global 
governance. As part of the Convention’s critical platform 
for policy dialogue, Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity 
contributes to this collective endeavour. It offers updated 
insights on how countries are navigating these challenges and 
evidence-based recommendations to inspire policy action. 
Making Creativity Matter
254 billion US$
Cultural goods 
trade is valued at
in 2023
‘Since wars begin in the minds of men and 
women, it is in the minds of men and women 
that the defences of peace must be constructed. ’
Foreword
The diversity of cultural expressions is not a privilege reserved for the few. It is a condition 
of human dignity for all. 
For nearly a decade, the Re|Shaping Cultural Policies for Creativity report has 
accompanied this ambition. It has become a unique global reference, offering a clear 
and comparative picture of how States are working to protect and promote the diversity 
of cultural expressions. 
Published eighty years after the creation of UNESCO and two decades after the 
adoption of the 2005 Convention for the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity 
of Cultural Expressions, this fourth edition draws on 133 periodic reports and nearly 
4,000 policies and measures implemented between 2021 and 2024 to offer a clear-
eyed assessment of the paths taken.
The report reveals a central tension. While all reporting countries have now integrated 
culture into public policy — with dedicated ministries and expanded legal protections 
—, inequalities persist, and opportunities remain unevenly distributed. This is especially 
true for artists in low- and middle-income countries, who still face major barriers to 
mobility, infrastructure and access to markets, despite a cultural goods sector valued at 
US$254 billion in global trade. Gender gaps also endure, with nearly half of leadership 
roles now held by women, yet with strong regional disparities.
Investment remains limited, and funding is under pressure, with only 0.15% of 
development aid currently directed towards culture. At the same time, digital 
technologies and Artificial Intelligence (AI) are transforming how culture is created 
and shared. They offer new opportunities, but few safeguards: of 148 AI laws adopted 
globally, only one places culture at its core — raising serious questions about how 
diversity and human rights are upheld in the digital era.
In response to these challenges, UNESCO is taking concrete action. At the forefront of 
cultural policy development, the 2005 Convention has inspired ambitious initiatives 
worldwide. More than 8,100 measures have been identified — ranging from broadcasting 
quotas to financing schemes, from artist residencies to content export strategies. This 
momentum is also driven by the International Fund for Cultural Diversity, which has 
supported 164 projects in 76 countries since 2010, including 71 projects in Africa. It has 
been further reinforced with MONDIACULT 2022 and 2025, which reaffirmed culture 
as a global public good, inseparable from human rights and sustainable development.
I wish to express my gratitude to the Government of Sweden and the Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency for their continued support for this report.
Preserving the diversity of cultural expressions is about defending the very idea that 
every culture has something to say. It is about ensuring that all people, everywhere, 
have the freedom to create, to participate, and to be represented. That is the promise of 
the 2005 Convention. That is the commitment we renew with this report. 
© UNESCO
5
Khaled El-Enany 
Director-General of UNESCO
Editorial team
Principal Editor 
Jordi Baltà Portolés
Authors 
Bridget Conor, André Gouws, Véronique Guèvremont, 
Marie Le Sourd, Andra Matei, Andy C. Pratt, 
Heritiana Ranaivoson, Jen Snowball, Leandro Valiati, 
Ayeta Anne Wangusa, Rana Yazaji, Audrey Yue 
UNESCO Editorial Team 
Doyun Lee (Coordinator), Barbara Avila, 
Nicholas Doerr, Pablo Guayasamin Madrinan, 
Patricia Huang, Julie Pilato, Cory Sagerstrom, 
Ioana-Maria Tamas
Internal Peer Reviewers 
Guiomar Alonso Cano, Juanita Casas Castrillon, 
Anais Chagankerian, Moe Chiba, Elena Constantinou, 
Lydia Deloumeaux, Hanh Duong Bich, 
Florisse Hendschel, Rita Mae Louise Hyde, 
Laurence Mayer-Robitaille, Melika Medici Caucino, 
Karalyn Monteil, Caroline Munier, Laura Nonn, 
Floor Oudendijk, Ana Cristina Ruelas, 
Alcira Sandoval Ruiz, Lucie Schneider, 
Maria Rosario Soraide Duran, Reiko Yoshida, 
Yiline Zhao 
External Reviewers 
Mira Burri, Laurence Cuny, Khadija El Bannaoui, 
Belén Igarzábal, Marisa Henderson, Joseph Lo, 
Christine M. Merkel, Ekaterina Travkina
6
Acknowledgements
The fourth edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report would not have been possible 
without the financial support of the Swedish Government and the Swedish International 
Development Cooperation Agency.
The report was produced under the direction of Ernesto Ottone R., Assistant Director-General for 
Culture of UNESCO, and Toussaint Tiendrebeogo, Secretary of the 2005 Convention and Chief of 
the Diversity of Cultural Expressions Entity.
The report benefitted from many current and former colleagues working at UNESCO, whose 
contributions are gratefully acknowledged. They are Denise Bax, Suzanne Bonfils, Alessandra 
Borchi, Leilani Coe, Guilherme Canela De Souza Godoi, Dorine Dubois, Klara Dreze, Donia El Guess, 
José Pablo Fernández Garcia, Carole Freige, Emilie Gautier, Maissa Gourar, Coline Guego, Kevin 
Guezennec, Anthony Krause, Romane Lord-Morin, Seoyoung Oh, Nefise Ozcelik, Emmanuelle Pivard, 
Emmanuelle Robert, Yvonne Rwabukumba, Najet Saafi, Matilda Saori Machimura, Djorogo Christian 
Tanon and Gabrielle Thiboutot.
BOP Consulting, led by Richard Naylor with the support of Genevieve Marciniak, Lizzie Parker, 
Yasmeen Safaie, Nora Ruzsiczky and Yuhan Ji, was a crucial partner for the production of the report 
and central in the processing, analysis and presentation of data included throughout the report. 
They also provided steadfast support to the editorial team in reviewing and revising the chapters.
Special thanks go to the national points of contact for the 2005 Convention, who accompanied with 
dedication their countries’ preparation of Quadrennial Periodic Reports and without which this report 
would not have been possible.
The report’s design and layout were produced by Corinne Hayworth, with also the support of 
UNESCO’s Division for Conferences, Languages and Documents for the printing of the report. 
The manuscript was edited by Meagan Mason and translated by Atlantique Traduction, with 
language concordance check conducted by Léa Benabdelghaffar and Rosalie Marquis Angulo. 
The English version of the report was proofread by Jennifer Marie Bridgett Webster, and the French 
by Isabelle Georgette Delvare.
Finally, the artists who graciously agreed to the use of the images of their works throughout 
this report are sincerely thanked. 
7
Contents 
Foreword 5
Acknowledgements 7
Contents  8
Introduction • We share, we act, we build 11 
Ernesto Ottone R.
The Convention, 20 years later: progress made, many challenges still to face 15  
Jordi Baltà Portolés
GOAL 1  SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE SYSTEMS 
OF GOVERNANCE FOR CULTURE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
Chapter 1 Building on strong foundations 23
 Andy C. Pratt
Chapter 2 Reconfiguring media diversity 43
 Audrey Yue
Chapter 3  The digital environment: online culture, offline implications 63
 Heritiana Ranaivoson
Chapter 4 Civil society, voices for culture and action 85
 Ayeta Anne Wangusa
GOAL 2  ACHIEVE A BALANCED FLOW OF CULTURAL GOODS 
AND SERVICES AND INCREASE THE MOBILITY 
OF ARTISTS AND CULTURAL PROFESSIONALS . . . . . . . . . 103
Chapter 5 The shifting borders of cultural mobility 105
 Marie Le Sourd and Rana Yazaji
Chapter 6 Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 123
 André Gouws and Jen Snowball
Chapter 7  Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora 143
 Véronique Guèvremont
8
GOAL 3  INTEGRATE CULTURE IN SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORKS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
Chapter 8 Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development 165
 Leandro Valiati
GOAL 4   PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS 
AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
Chapter 9 Gender equality: not an optional extra 187
 Bridget Conor
Chapter 10 Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice 207
 Andra Matei
Annexes ............................................................................. 229
Author biographies  230
Methodology 234
Bibliography 243
List of figures and tables 263
Image credits 267
9
© Soner Arkan/Pexels.com
We share, we act, 
we build
11
Introduction
Ernesto Ottone R.
UNESCO Assistant Director-General for Culture
© Soner Arkan/Pexels.com
LOOKING BACK
‘ Anniversaries are a time for reflection and planning’ was 
the opening line of the inaugural edition of the Re|Shaping 
Policies for Creativity report. The timing is especially 
meaningful for this fourth edition, as it coincides with the 
2005 Convention’s twentieth anniversary, marking two 
decades since its adoption by the General Conference on 
20 October 2005. 
When the Re|Shaping report was first published in 2015, it 
was hailed as ‘likely to be a milestone in the advancement 
of cultural policy research across the world’ (UNESCO, 
2015), because, until then, no report at the global level 
had existed to monitor national cultural policies in the 
field of the diversity of cultural expressions. 
UNESCO has been at the forefront of cultural policy 
development since the 1960s, beginning with its Round-
Table Meeting on Cultural Policies in 1967 , followed by 
the publication of the seminal volume Cultural Policy 
– a Preliminary Study (UNESCO, 1969) and a series of 
reports on national cultural policies prepared by UNESCO 
Member States through the 1970s and 1980s. Yet, the 
need for evaluation methods and statistical indicators 
persisted over the years, particularly as the sector lacked 
robust monitoring and evaluation systems. 
The process of monitoring the Convention’s 
implementation was put in place in 201 1 , and the first 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports were submitted in 2012. 
However, an important barrier to the implementation 
of the Convention was the lack of baseline data on 
cultural policies and cultural and creative industries that 
could inform policy making. In 2014, UNESCO’s Internal 
Oversight Service recommended initiating work towards 
developing an overall results framework for the Convention, 
including objectives, indicators and benchmarks (UNESCO, 
2014) to capture evolving trends and respond to changing 
contexts. This recommendation prepared the ground for the 
birth of the Convention’s Monitoring Framework, structured 
around four goals and 1 1 areas of monitoring, which 
have been the backbone of the Convention’s knowledge 
production and sharing for the past decade. 
The Monitoring Framework was designed ‘to share, not 
compare’ (UNESCO, 2015), and the guiding principles 
and values underpinning the Convention have shaped 
its four monitoring goals, which encompass sustainable 
systems of governance for culture; the balanced flow of 
cultural goods and services and the mobility of artists and 
cultural professionals; the integration of culture within 
sustainable development frameworks; and the promotion 
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. 
The four monitoring goals are rooted in the Convention’s 
scope and its vision for the cultural ecosystem, guiding 
data collection to identify emerging trends and challenges 
that inform cultural policies and initiatives worldwide. 
Their strength lies in the distinct perspectives they bring to 
the creative sector, allowing for a nuanced understanding 
of its current state and what it could become with – or 
without – appropriate action. 
Each edition of the Re|Shaping report has introduced its 
own innovation. This fourth edition breaks new ground 
by presenting a longitudinal analysis over the years, 
while also tracking progress and setbacks since its last 
edition in 2022. Drawing on 133 reports representing 
3,908 policies and measures collected between 2021 and 
2024, this edition benefits from a data volume increase 
of 87% compared with the first edition and 1 15% more 
than the second, providing a more comprehensive and 
representative perspective of global cultural policies. 
While this allows us to measure what has improved or 
stagnated, persistent ‘data deserts’ highlight critical gaps 
in global monitoring. 
UNESCO’s leadership in global cultural governance 
As we marked the twentieth anniversary of the 2005 
Convention in 2025, a historic milestone was reached: 
100% of reporting countries now have established 
ministries or agencies dedicated to culture. Furthermore, 
92% of Parties now have mechanisms facilitating 
interministerial cooperation, and the proportion of 
countries with institutions responsible for collecting 
cultural statistics has risen to 81%. These milestones, 
driven by UNESCO’s sustained advocacy, confirm the 
significant progress in establishing strong governance 
frameworks that provide a foundation for evidence-based 
and participatory policy making. 
In this context, UNESCO’s convening of the World 
Conference on Cultural Policies (MONDIACULT) has been 
central to strengthening global cultural governance. 
As a unique multilateral forum for policy dialogue, 
MONDIACULT has reaffirmed culture as a global 
public good, integral to human rights and sustainable 
development, while also advancing the production of 
up-to-date cultural data at national and international 
levels. This leadership has culminated in the systematic 
integration of culture into the highest United Nations 
policy fora, including the landmark Pact for the Future 
(2024). However, this institutional progress has not yet 
been fully reflected in international trade agreements. 
Among the 269 trade agreements concluded since 2005, 
only 3% explicitly reference the 2005 Convention. 
12
Structural imbalances and mobility barriers
While we celebrate institutional gains, the cultural sector 
remains hindered by deep-seated structural imbalances 
and vulnerabilities. Despite increases in direct government 
funding for culture in developing countries, the global 
average remains below 0.6% of gross domestic product. 
International funding is critically low: in 2022, only 
0.15% of Country Programmable Aid went to culture and 
recreation, and between 2006 and 2022, the cultural 
and creative industries received only a small share of Aid 
for Trade. 
These constraints are epitomized by a persistent ‘visa 
wall’ that restricts the movement of artists from the 
Global South. While 96% of developed countries support 
outward mobility, only 38% facilitate inward mobility 
from developing nations. In parallel, funding constraints 
are stifling not only government programmes but also 
civil society initiatives, with 67% of organizations 
reporting direct impacts from funding cuts – particularly 
organizations supporting human rights, democracy, 
gender equality and inclusive participation. 
Finally, the near collapse in foreign direct investment stock 
in developing countries after 2020 further highlights a 
growing investment gap. Combined with ongoing resource 
shortages and limited institutional capacity, this gap 
continues to limit many countries’ ability to fully protect 
and promote the diversity of cultural expressions.
Rights, equality and protection gaps
Culture is fundamental to social equity, inclusion and 
cohesion. It underpins human rights and freedoms, and 
is essential for building just, peaceful and sustainable 
societies. To this end, countries are urged to strengthen 
cultural policies and institutions so that culture reaches all 
communities and addresses structural inequalities. 
Within this framework, progress on gender equality, a 
priority for UNESCO, remains uneven. While women’s 
leadership in national arts and cultural institutions has 
risen globally from 31% in 2017 to 46% in 2024, wide 
disparities remain between developing countries (30%) 
and developed countries (64%). The share of countries 
with ministries or government bodies addressing gender 
equality for artists and cultural professionals has declined 
slightly from 72% to 69%, with the sharpest declines in 
developing countries. 
Furthermore, formal recognition of rights does not 
always translate into effective protection. Although over 
90% of Parties now report legal guarantees for artistic 
expression, violations are rising – including the use of 
strategic lawsuits against public participation (SLAPPs) 
to intimidate and silence artists by exhausting them 
financially and psychologically. These legal pressures, 
alongside a 7 percentage point decline in independent 
monitoring bodies in certain regions, contribute to self-
censorship and a pervasive chilling effect. Continued 
strategic action is therefore required to advance equality 
in the sector and ensure that artistic freedom moves 
from mere legal recognition to enforceable practice.
The digital environment and AI governance 
The digital environment, including Artificial Intelligence 
(AI), is reshaping cultural creation, production, distribution 
and access. While 85% of Parties now implement digital 
cultural strategies, a ‘regulatory vacuum’ persists regarding 
Generative AI. Only 48% of Parties report measures to 
develop statistics or studies on access to digital media, and 
out of 148 bills on AI passed globally, only one identifies 
culture as its primary subject matter. 
At the same time, the economic and professional impacts 
on creators are increasingly evident. While digital-source 
revenues now account for 35% of creators’ income, an 
overwhelming 79% of cultural professionals perceive AI 
as a threat to their livelihoods, citing the unlicensed use 
of copyrighted data and the potential devaluation of 
human creativity. 
Yet, digital tools and AI offer significant opportunities 
– to democratize access to cultural experiences, revitalize 
heritage and foster innovative cultural expressions. 
Realizing these benefits requires targeted investment 
in digital and AI literacy for cultural professionals, 
enabling creators to engage with these technologies 
ethically while maintaining cultural integrity. Unequal 
access risks deepening global disparities, highlighting 
the importance of UNESCO’s multilateral, cross-sectoral 
governance approach. In this regard, the UNESCO 
2021 Recommendation on the Ethics of AI provides a 
framework for aligning algorithmic governance with 
human rights and cultural sovereignty, while protecting 
cultural diversity from content homogenization.
Bridging the action gap 
Trade in cultural goods has nearly doubled since 2005, 
reaching US$254.28 billion in 2023. Developing 
countries have recorded an average growth rate of 
8.5% for cultural goods and now account for 20% of 
global trade in cultural services. However, this progress 
is threatened by an over 95% contraction in the annual 
growth rate of foreign direct investment stock among 
developing countries. 
13
Introduction
At policy level, a disconnect exists between formal 
recognition of the cultural and creative industries in 
National Development Plans or National Sustainable 
Development Plans and concrete engagement. While 
93% of Parties involve cultural bodies in national 
planning, only 25% of reported measures integrating 
culture into sustainable development frameworks have 
been evaluated, limiting accountability and opportunities 
for learning. Furthermore, expectations regarding culture’s 
contribution to environmental outcomes have fallen 
to 1 1%. 
To address this action gap, UNESCO is spearheading global 
action through the Group of Friends of Culture-Based 
Climate Action at COPs 28, 29 and 30, mainstreaming 
culture as an indispensable tool for societal transformation 
and climate resilience.
LOOKING FORWARD: 
THE POST-2030 AGENDA 
As the twentieth anniversary of the 2005 Convention is 
marked, we stand at a strategic turning point. The global 
creative landscape has been fundamentally transformed, 
and the pace of change will only accelerate. This report 
invites policy makers and civil society to move beyond 
symbolic recognition and fully integrate culture as a driver 
of sustainable development, economic growth, peace and 
social cohesion, and to embed culture as a global public 
good within the post-2030 framework. 
Protecting the diversity of cultural expressions is a 
shared responsibility – one that requires reinforcing 
interministerial cooperation, mobilizing resources for 
equitable cultural participation and bridging structural 
barriers to ensure creative voices thrive, for present and 
future generations. UNESCO reaffirms its unwavering 
commitment to strengthening the creative ecosystem, 
harnessing culture for inclusive development and 
safeguarding the diversity that makes our world resilient.
14
The Convention, 
20 years later: 
progress made, many 
challenges still to face 
15
 
Jordi Baltà Portolés
Principal Editor
This fourth edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity 
report marks 20 years since the adoption of the Convention 
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions, and ten years since the report was first 
published in 2015. It provides a vantage point from which 
to examine how the core architecture of cultural governance 
has matured, how the challenges identified have evolved, 
and how the global landscape for cultural ecosystems, 
creativity and diversity has changed.
STRONGER POLICY INFRASTRUCTURE – 
ALONGSIDE OLD AND NEW CHALLENGES
One of the main aims of the Convention is to enable 
Parties to adopt policies and measures that protect and 
promote the diversity of cultural expressions, through the 
establishment of sustainable systems of governance for 
culture. As this report shows, the building blocks for the 
design and implementation of policies aligned with the 
Convention now exist in a large majority of countries – 
to an extent that has never been seen before within the 
framework of the Convention. 
Several core indicators show that a large majority 
of Parties have established the necessary policy 
infrastructures, including decentralization of 
responsibilities for culture at the local or regional level, 
policies in areas related to digital aspects, and the legal 
recognition of artistic freedom. They have also adopted 
plans and programmes in key areas, including export 
strategies for cultural goods and services, and national 
sustainable development plans. While these foundations 
are solid, the report shows that interministerial 
collaboration nonetheless exposes coordination 
challenges within existing institutional frameworks. 
It is also encouraging to see that, in several cases, 
developing countries are taking the lead in policy 
adoption, and narrowing the gap with developed 
countries. On average, their public funding for culture 
has increased, even if the global trend reflects a long-
term and continuous decline. Similarly, their efforts 
to involve civil society organizations in policy making 
have strengthened, even as participatory monitoring 
mechanisms face new challenges at the national level.
Alongside these positive developments, the report 
also sheds light on areas where progress has stalled or 
emerging challenges demand new policy responses. One 
recurring issue is the limited engagement of ministries 
of culture in cross-cutting domains that impact on the 
diversity of cultural expressions. Today, protecting and 
promoting the diversity of cultural expressions requires 
influence over digital and Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
strategies, international trade negotiations and related 
agreements, the provision of visas, and social protection 
systems adapted to the needs of artists and culture 
professionals. Several chapters in this report show that 
much remains to be done, particularly in translating 
interministerial mechanisms into effective and tailored 
policies across government. 
Likewise, whereas the report demonstrates civil society’s 
involvement in policy debates in many countries, it also 
points to the need for more structured and permanent 
governance arrangements involving civil society alongside 
governments, and demonstrating mutual trust. Civil 
society activities, however, are increasingly hampered by 
restrictive legislation and reduced civic space – trends 
that the report highlights as a significant threat to the 
long-term resilience of cultural ecosystems.
EVOLUTION OF CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED 
IN THE 2022 REPORT
Since the last Re|Shaping report assessment in 2022, 
the digitization of cultural content has evolved from an 
emergency pandemic response into a set of permanent 
structural shifts. In this context, this report presents 
initiatives aimed at improving working conditions and 
adapting policy approaches to the digital environment 
to strengthen skills and enable more sustainable 
business models. 
The structural challenges observed four years ago – 
including the digital divide, gender inequality and labour 
precarity – remain largely relevant as AI continues to 
gain ground. These areas demand reinforced attention 
in the coming years. In a context of increasing demands 
on governments’ policy priorities, effective policy making 
will depend on more robust dialogue and collaboration 
between governments and civil society, as well as the 
allocation of adequate resources. 
THE PERVASIVE IMPACTS OF 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Artificial Intelligence is a cross-cutting force in this 
report, reflecting how cultural practices are being deeply 
transformed. Algorithms now determine how diverse 
cultural content is distributed, accessed and discovered, 
with significant implications for public debate. Addressing 
these challenges – and the potential opportunities 
they create – calls for integrated policy responses that 
encompass technological, economic, social, educational 
and ethical considerations. 
16
This requires sustained interministerial collaboration, 
as well as partnerships among public, private and civil 
society stakeholders, to safeguard human creativity and 
the diversity of cultural expressions in an increasingly 
AI-driven landscape.
Given the pervasive nature of AI-related challenges, 
responsive policies and measures should also operate at 
multiple levels. This report explores a technical roadmap 
that includes updated regulatory frameworks, capacity-
building initiatives and the development of ethical 
guidelines. These actions, supported by international 
agreements, are essential to ensure that Parties can 
effectively implement policies that protect and promote 
the diversity of cultural expressions within their territory.
SHIFTS AND TRANSFORMATIONS 
IN THE GLOBAL SCENE
At the heart of the 2005 Convention is the aim to balance 
global cultural relations and ensure sustainable cultural 
ecosystems representative of cultural diversity. Data 
presented in this report, particularly in Chapter 6 on the 
flow of cultural goods and services, show that trade in 
cultural goods has become more balanced over the years, 
due to the stronger position of upper-middle-income 
developing countries. Several chapters also point to a 
significant increase in South-South cultural cooperation 
connecting developing countries.
Meanwhile, lower-middle-income countries and Least 
Developed Countries remain under-represented in the 
trade of cultural goods and services. This continues to be 
a significant weakness and a cause for concern. So too is 
the limited attention devoted to culture in international 
development cooperation – a gap that calls for more 
integrated strategic planning and market-access support to 
ensure the participation of Least Developed Countries in 
the global creative economy. 
Furthermore, as in previous editions, this report confirms 
the very limited application of the principle of preferential 
treatment enshrined in Article 16 of the Convention. Beyond 
practical barriers to mobility, developed countries often lack 
structured mechanisms to facilitate access for cultural goods, 
services and professionals from the Global South. Addressing 
this requires a technical roadmap centred on systemic 
monitoring, interministerial coordination and international 
cooperation, in order to move beyond ad hoc measures 
towards binding commitments.
In the global scene, this period has been marked by 
aggravated armed conflicts, the climate crisis and attacks 
on the multilateral order. Support for the diversity of 
cultural expressions therefore faces a complex and 
paradoxical reality. While awareness of human rights, 
gender equality and artistic freedom is growing, many 
societies are experiencing a backlash against equity and 
diversity, alongside rising digital threats against diverse 
voices. These trends directly shape the environment in which 
policies for diversity are being developed and implemented, 
underscoring the need for stronger recognition of culture 
as a global public good in international agendas. This 
need becomes particularly evident in areas such as the 
shifting discoverability of diverse content in the media, 
the emergence of new factors prompting artists to cross 
international borders and the feasibility of adopting trade 
agreements that recognize the intrinsic value of diversity.
In response to this changing landscape, and to the 
challenges that affect the diversity of cultural expressions 
at the global level, this report advocates for stronger 
inter-agency collaboration, connecting UNESCO with 
international and regional partners to strengthen the 
multilateral framework of the Convention. Furthermore, a 
stronger recognition of culture within global agendas – 
reaffirming its status as a global public good, as stated in 
the UNESCO Global Report on Cultural Policies (2025) – is 
essential to provide the necessary strategic backing to 
support diversity in both domestic and global policy.
THE NEED TO CONTINUE IMPROVING 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
The Re|Shaping report series serves to analyse trends 
and facilitate the exchange of information and policy 
approaches among Parties, researchers and practitioners. 
To this end, successive editions have called for improving 
cultural information systems – which are essential not 
only for this report, but also for identifying needs on the 
ground and for evaluating the effectiveness of policies 
and measures. 
While this report presents numerous innovative approaches 
and good practices, it also identifies persistent ‘data 
deserts’ that require more sophisticated monitoring and 
knowledge tools. There is a clear need to improve data 
availability and to evaluate policies more frequently to 
ensure they remain responsive to current challenges.
In light of the high proportion of positive responses to 
existing indicators, many authors have included in their 
chapters recommendations to revise the Monitoring 
Framework of the 2005 Convention, introducing more 
complex indicators that allow for a more nuanced 
understanding of cultural governance and that align with 
the strategic discussions held at the Conference of Parties 
to the Convention in June 2025.
17
Introduction
Taken together, the findings in this report underscore the 
evolving nature of the implementation of the Convention 
and the necessity of regularly reassessing its tools, priorities 
and objectives in response to global transformations. Over 
the past 20 years, the 2005 Convention has significantly 
strengthened the global policy infrastructure around 
diversity by clarifying the interconnected nature of 
the policies needed to support the diversity of cultural 
expressions at both national and global level. Yet, as 
political, technological and social shifts continue to reshape 
the creative landscape, new and more sophisticated 
responses are required to ensure that creative voices thrive. 
While ten years of systematic policy monitoring marks 
a substantial milestone, within the broader context of 
UNESCO’s 80-year history, this ambitious undertaking has 
only just begun. 
18
19
Introduction © Patrycja Chociej/Unsplash.com

SUPPORT 
SUSTAINABLE 
SYSTEMS OF 
GOVERNANCE 
FOR CULTURE
Goal 1
© Paul Phung*
© Jessica Christina. Headpiece artwork by Mulyana, 
attire created by Douche, featuring artist from Inspyro Moves*
23
Chapter 1
Building on 
strong foundations
Andy C. Pratt
© Jessica Christina. Headpiece artwork by Mulyana, 
attire created by Douche, featuring artist from Inspyro Moves*
24
 ¡ Cultural policy is increasingly oriented towards employment. 
Today 85% of Parties report job creation measures, up from 
68% in the last reporting cycle. The most frequently reported 
measures, each cited by 29% of Parties, are integrating 
cultural employment into broader cultural policy strategies or 
national development plans and improving access to finance. 
 ¡ Concerns are growing about formalizing cultural and creative 
sector activities within broader economy and governance 
frameworks. This reflects the persistent precarity of work in 
the sector – characterized by high levels of non-standard 
employment – including self-employment, part-time, secondary 
and intermittent work – and limited access to social benefits 
such as pensions, childcare and sick leave. 
 ¡ Labour market data indicate that self-employment in the 
cultural and creative sectors can be significantly higher 
than economy-wide averages. While these arrangements 
offer flexibility, Parties note that they also create structural 
vulnerabilities that underscore the need for stronger 
formalization measures.
 ¡ Intellectual Property and copyright are critical to building 
resilient cultural and creative industries, yet many regions 
still show low respect for copyright and lack effective 
collective management organizations (CMOs) to collect and 
redistribute earnings from creative work. Coverage beyond 
the music sector remains particularly weak: while CMOs for 
music operate in just over two-thirds of Parties, only 23-24% 
of developing countries have CMOs covering audio-visual, 
literary, visual arts, photography or graphic design fields. 
 ¡ Education and training in the cultural and creative sector 
are shifting rapidly in response to technological change and 
evolving labour market needs. While 83% of Parties still offer 
university-level programmes, as in the last reporting cycle, 
coverage has declined across several domains – including 
media arts, music, performing arts and visual arts, each 
domain scoring between 71% and 78%. Publishing is now 
the least supported at 60% in tertiary and 63% in technical 
and vocational education and training (TVET) programmes, 
followed by cultural management at 65%. This indicates a 
continuing education gap. In contrast, TVET programmes have 
expanded sharply, from 76% to 93%, addressing shortages in 
technical and craft skills. Cinema, audio-visual arts and design 
show strong growth across both tertiary and TVET offerings, 
reversing previous trends. Digital literacy programmes for 
creation and experimentation have also surged, from 49% to 
63%, reflecting rapid adaptation to technological change.
 ¡ Capacity building, funding, and artist development 
programmes remain among the most popular measures, 
reported by 31 .7% of Parties. Developing countries (85%) 
implement capacity-building initiatives more often than 
developed countries (79%) to help artists monetize their work, 
reflecting the need for more solid institutional frameworks for 
training and capacity building.
 ¡ Cultural governance has strengthened significantly. By 
2024, all Parties reported having a ministry or agency with 
responsibility and funding for culture, signalling growing 
acknowledgement of the need for robust institutional 
frameworks to support the cultural and creative sector.
 ¡ Decentralization trends are reinforcing this progress. 
Responsibilities for promoting the cultural and creative sectors 
expanded from 79% to 90% of Parties, and 92% now report 
having regulatory frameworks that foster interministerial 
cooperation. These developments indicate a broad commitment 
to strengthening cultural governance at multiple levels. 
 ¡ Education and economic ministries are the main partners in 
interministerial cooperation. Education agencies now account 
for 28.1% of partnerships (up from 19%), and trade, economy, 
business and finance ministries account for 25%, reflecting a 
focus on leveraging the economic contributions of the cultural 
and creative sector. Still, a major gap remains between policy 
recognition and implementation in the area of innovation: 
although 77% of reporting countries acknowledge ‘creativity 
and innovation’ in their national sustainable development 
plans, only 3% of interministerial cooperation measures 
involve innovation-focused agencies. This disparity indicates 
challenges in aligning the sector’s creative potential with policy 
frameworks that tend to prioritize technological innovation.
 ¡ Developing countries are narrowing the public funding gap, 
but the global average remains below 0.6% of GDP , reflecting 
a continuous decline in direct funding for culture globally. 
Developing countries have increased government spending 
on culture since 2018, while spending in developed countries 
has generally flatlined or declined since 2014. Despite this 
convergence, developed countries still allocate more than 
twice the share of their GDP to the cultural and creative sector 
compared to developing countries.
 ¡ Indirect public expenditures – such as tax deductions – are 
becoming a major policy tool for supporting the cultural and 
creative sector, particularly in the audio-visual sector. While direct 
public expenditures produce cultural goods with distinct social 
and cultural value, tax incentives work by reducing financial 
barriers for private sector investment. Yet, the impact of fiscal 
incentives policies is rarely examined beyond a narrow economic 
perspective, raising critical questions about their purpose, 
effectiveness and influence on the diversity of cultural expressions.
 ¡ Comprehensive and reliable data are essential for effective 
cultural policy making, as they enable assessment of policy results 
and foster evidence-based governance. The share of Parties with 
institutions for collecting cultural statistics has risen from 62% 
to 81%, and those with statistical offices or research bodies 
evaluating cultural policies has increased from 46% to 61%. 
However, their development lags behind most other areas of 
public policy (such as health, education and transport), and Parties 
frequently report challenges such as limited statistical reporting, 
expertise and resources for interministerial coordination. 
KEY FINDINGS
25
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
100% of reporting countries 
indicate having a ministry/agency 
with competence and funding for culture
92% of countries have 
regulatory frameworks supporting 
interministerial cooperation
Less than 0.6% of GDP is dedicated 
to direct funding for culture globally
Cultural statistics development 
lags behind other areas of public 
policy (health, education, transport)
Precarity of work in the creative sector 
remains persistent
Intellectual Property 
and copyright frameworks 
remain weak, with collective 
management organizations 
limited in developing countries
University-level programmes 
have declined, especially in 
publishing and cultural management
62% ➞ 81%
The share of countries with institutions 
collecting cultural statistics is rising
Indirect public expenditures 
are increasingly used as policy tools; 
however, their impact on cultural 
expressions needs to be assessed
Ministries of education 
and economy are 
emerging as main partners 
for interministerial 
cooperation
Cultural policy is increasingly 
oriented towards employment, 
with 85% of countries reporting 
job creation measures
49% ➞ 63%
More countries report digital 
creation and experimentation 
literacy programmes, reflecting 
adaptation to technological change
Monitoring and 
collecting 
cultural statistics
Interministerial 
cooperation
Accessible 
public cultural 
services
Effective 
cultural policies
Funding for 
culture
Robust institutional frameworks for cultural governance are crucial for:
Increased measures addressing 
technical workforce and skills gaps, 
with cultural TVET programmes
in 93% of countries
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
26
INTRODUCTION
As the cultural and creative sectors navigate an increasingly 
complex landscape, this opening chapter of the Re|Shaping 
Policies for Creativity report examines the foundational 
elements sustaining creative ecosystems – governance 
structures, public funding, training opportunities and 
policy priorities observed over the course of the four 
years from 2021 to 2024. Framed by Goal 1 of the 
Monitoring Framework of the Convention on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions 
(2005 Convention), the chapter examines two key 
indicators: the extent to which policies and measures 
support the development of dynamic cultural and creative 
sectors, and the degree to which policy making is informed 
and involves multiple public bodies.
Since the last edition of the report in 2022, the world has 
undergone profound shifts. The COVID-19 pandemic initially 
elevated the visibility of culture as a vital part of public life 
and well-being. Yet, this recognition has been challenged by 
a cascade of global crises – armed conflicts, rising political 
polarization, rapid technological development and the rise of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). These overlapping pressures have 
strained public budgets and shifted policy priorities, often to 
the detriment of culture. This chapter attempts to correlate 
recent data with possible factors that have influenced recent 
trends in the governance of the cultural and creative sector. 
The 20th anniversary of the 2005 Convention in 2025 
offered a valuable long-term perspective. Over the past two 
decades, the Convention has helped shape a more holistic 
and integrated approach to cultural policy. By embedding 
culture within broader development agendas and promoting 
the complementarity of economic and cultural goals, it has 
encouraged Parties to the Convention to view culture not as 
a luxury, but as a driver of sustainable development, social 
cohesion and innovation. And there is clear evidence of 
progress, along with a growing recognition of the need for 
robust institutional frameworks to support the cultural and 
creative sector.
However, the short and long term, as well as the regional 
and global perspectives presented in this chapter, underscore 
that challenges persist. For example, the global average of 
direct funding for culture continues to decline, even though 
the gap between developed and developing countries 
appears to be narrowing for the first time in a decade. As 
cultural policy increasingly intersects with economic and 
educational agendas, new opportunities – and tensions – 
are emerging. Governments are exploring ways to harness 
the creative economy for job creation and innovation, while 
grappling with persistent challenges unique to the sector. 
At the same time, a global shift in education priorities raises 
pressing questions about the future of artistic talent and 
the role of creativity in a tech-driven world. This chapter 
explores these evolving dynamics and their implications 
for the cultural and creative sector.
SETTING THE STAGE FOR INFORMED 
POLICY MAKING
Institutional architecture and ministerial mandates
When Parties to the 2005 Convention first reported in 2020 
on the existence of a ministry or agency with ministerial status 
responsible for cultural and creative sectors, the proportion 
of Parties with such institutions was already exceptionally 
high across regions, with only the Asia and the Pacific region 
reporting a marginally lower rate (93%). Today, all reporting 
countries (100%) have established ministries or agencies 
with competence and budgets for culture. 
Box 1 .1 • Azerbaijan: establishment of the 
Department of Creative Industries and Digital 
Development at the Ministry of Culture 
Established in September 2021 , the Department of 
Creative Industries and Digital Development aims to 
enhance the role of cultural and creative industries in 
national development and policy making. Key activities 
include strengthening the legal and policy framework 
for cultural and creative industries, supporting their 
digital transformation – particularly accelerated by 
the COVID-19 pandemic – and leading inclusive policy 
dialogue with various stakeholders. Additionally, the 
department operates the Creative Azerbaijan web 
portal (www.creative.az) to promote awareness, local 
production and export of creative goods and services, 
as well as to foster a supportive ecosystem for cultural 
and creative industries in Azerbaijan, particularly in the 
digital environment.
In the same year, the Azerbaijan Creative Industries 
Federation was also established to coordinate 
the development of creative industries, manage 
international and local projects, and coordinate 
government agencies and business partners with 
individuals, companies and public organizations 
operating in the field. The Federation is mandated 
to carry out awareness-raising activities; support the 
development of small and medium-sized enterprises 
in Azerbaijan; promote the production, promotion and 
export of creative products and services; support public 
entities in the field of creative industries; and develop 
initiatives within this framework. 
Source: Azerbaijan QPR, 2022
27
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
While there has not been a significant change in the 
proportion of Parties reporting ministries or agencies 
with competence and budgets for culture, several Parties 
have reported changes in ministerial or governmental 
structures, including new ministries or departments being 
established. Where this has been reported, cultural and 
creative industries are placed alongside broader agendas. 
For example, Saint Lucia has created a combined ministry 
responsible for all areas of culture and creative industries, 
as well as information, media and broadcasting. The newly 
created Ministry of Tourism, Investment, Creative Industries, 
Culture and Information identifies the Cultural Development 
Foundation as its main implementing agency. Similarly, 
Azerbaijan has created new structures tasked with advancing 
both cultural and digital development (Box 1 .1). Among 
the countries that took part in the UNESCO Culture 2030 
Indicators pilot phase, seven out of ten (Burkina Faso, 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Morocco, Philippines, Portugal and 
Viet Nam) reported that tourism and sports/recreation were 
also included within the remit of their ministries responsible 
for culture. Not only do the cultural and creative sectors 
have global recognition within the policy-making arena, 
but these developments also indicate a trend towards 
the alignment of culture and other national development 
strategies (a topic explored in more detail in Chapter 8).
Interministerial collaboration and decentralization
A high percentage (92% globally) of countries report having 
regulatory frameworks that support the cultural and creative 
sector through interministerial cooperation, providing 
ongoing evidence of transversal cultural policy making. This 
level has remained largely stable since the last reporting 
period, although the share of developing countries reporting 
such frameworks declined slightly (from 92% in 2017-2020 
to 89%). Regionally, the Latin American and Caribbean 
region is somewhat of an outlier, with a noticeably 
lower proportion of countries engaged in interministerial 
cooperation of this sort (76%), which has also decreased 
slightly from 81% in 2017-2020.
Closer analysis reveals that transversal collaboration extends 
across a wide range of separate policy domains (15). Of 
these, the most frequent partners for measures developed 
through interministerial cooperation were ministries and 
agencies in charge of education; these represented 28.1% 
of collaborative frameworks and measures (Figure 1 .1). This 
represents a notable increase from the share recorded in the 
previous edition of the Re|Shaping report, when education 
was represented in 19% of the policies and measures 
designed through interministerial cooperation. Reported 
measures of this kind include collaboration on curriculum 
development and programmes to address skills gaps in the 
cultural workforce. 
Figure 1 .1
Distribution of policies and measures designed 
through interministerial cooperation, 
by remit of partnering ministries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Examples include the ‘Egyptian Craftspeople’ initiative, as well 
as scholarships for cultural professionals as seen in Indonesia, 
Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. In Lithuania, the 
‘Cultural Passport’ initiative, launched in 2018, provides each 
student with a set allowance for cultural education activities 
(1 1 euros for the 2024 school year). The project ‘Sustainable 
Interaction of Culture and Education’ further enhanced this 
initiative between 2022 and 2024, contributing to improving 
students’ cultural competencies, with notable gains in critical 
thinking and creativity. It also laid the groundwork for deeper 
cooperation between cultural and education sectors, ensuring 
that cultural education becomes an integral part of student 
education and positioning cultural institutions as trusted 
providers of high-quality content in both formal and informal 
education settings.
The important relationship between culture and education is 
also reinforced through the UNESCO Framework for Culture 
and Arts Education, which was unanimously adopted by 
UNESCO Member States in February 2024 at the World 
Conference on Culture and Arts Education in Abu Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates. 
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
3.1%
5.1%
6.6%
8.7%
9.7%
11.2%
18.4%
28.1%
Citizenship, youth, equalities
Justice
Homeland security
Environment and planning
Local government
Health
Law and constitutional affairs
Innovation
Communication
Finance
Economy and business
Trade
Tourism
Foreign affairs
Education
28
The Framework promotes the effective integration of culture 
and arts education in both culture and education policies, 
alongside greater cooperation across public policy areas.
Figure 1 .1 also shows a clear focus on leveraging the 
economic dimensions and contributions of cultural and 
creative sectors: 25% of measures developed through 
interministerial cooperation involved agencies with a remit 
for trade, economy and business, or finance. These include 
measures such as tax incentives to stimulate economic 
activity in the cultural and creative sector and public-private 
partnership initiatives (Box 1 .2). In Finland, a cross-sector 
growth agreement for the audio-visual sector was launched 
by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment and 
the Ministry of Education and Culture in early 2022, while 
Business Finland and the Finnish Film Foundation were 
delegated to develop the initiative. A public-private working 
group was formed with representatives from the sector, 
with the aim to boost internationalization and sustained 
development within Finland’s audio-visual industry. With 
the sector already showing upward momentum, further 
work continues, and the successful model has since been 
extended to other creative industries starting in 2023.
After education, the most frequently reported agency 
involved in interministerial cooperation was foreign affairs 
(18.4%). This is not a surprising finding; rather, it reflects a 
continuing trend that underscores the important role of the 
2005 Convention as an international cooperation platform 
in the cultural and creative sector. It is worth noting that 
while the proportion of policies and measures developed 
through interministerial collaboration with foreign affairs 
agencies might suggest a decline from the 31% reported 
during the 2017-2020 period, this is solely due to the 
increase in the sample size, as the number of interministerial 
measures have doubled in the most recent reporting cycle 
from 120 to 240 between 2021 and 2024. 
For example, since 2021 , Andorra’s Ministry of Culture, 
Youth and Sport and its Ministry of Foreign Affairs have 
jointly implemented a ‘Cultural Diplomacy’ programme 
aimed at positioning the country as both a cultural producer 
and host. This targeted co-ministerial initiative has led to 
increased financial and governmental support for artistic 
residency programmes such as ‘FABER’ and ‘ ArtCamp’. For 
example, within the framework of ‘ ArtCamp’, the Department 
of Multilateral Affairs and Cooperation within the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs introduced a grant scheme for artists which 
supports projects that integrate art and themes of social 
justice and sustainable development.
International cooperation that supports the diversity of 
cultural expressions and sustainable development is a 
core principle of national cultural institutes around the 
world, as well as international regional organizations 
such as the European Union (EU). In fact, the EU’s Work 
Plan for Culture 2023-2026 includes strengthening the 
cultural dimension of the EU’s external relations as one 
of its four priorities. In this context, the Cultural Relations 
Platform is an EU-funded initiative supporting international 
cultural relations and cooperation between European 
and global cultural and creative sectors. It was launched 
in 2016 for a four-year period and later extended through 
2025. The Platform’s mission is to strengthen the EU’s 
ability to engage meaningfully with different audiences 
and stakeholders in partner countries, through enhanced 
cultural relations and cooperation with the cultural and 
creative sectors. The Cultural Relations Platform provides 
policy support for EU institutions; promotes and facilitates 
sustainable cultural exchanges, people-to-people activities 
and co-creation processes between European and non-
European actors active in the cultural and creative sector; 
and builds global communities. 
Box 1 .2 • Colombia: developing tax incentives in support of cultural and creative industries
Colombia has implemented several tax incentives to stimulate the growth of its cultural and creative industries. The Ministry 
of Cultures, Arts and Knowledge, in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance’s Directorate of National Taxes and Customs, 
introduced a tax exemption for eligible companies. At the time of reporting, 1 ,482 companies benefited from these tax breaks. 
Although this programme ran only from 2020 to 2022, Colombia continues to implement tax incentives in support of the 
cultural and creative sectors. These are now managed through the Colombian Crea Talent Corporation (CoCrea), established 
in 2019, which offers a 165% income tax deduction (meaning for every 100 Colombian pesos spent, up to 165 Colombian 
pesos can be deducted from the company’s taxable income) for private individuals and entities investing in or donating to 
approved cultural projects through open and public calls. As of 2024, CoCrea has issued 338 investment or donation certificates, 
representing contributions of 220.8 billion Colombian pesos for projects valued at more than 471 billion Colombian pesos. 
In addition, CoCrea has financed 221 projects related to arts, culture and heritage across 26 of Colombia’s 32 departments. 
Colombia’s Superior Council of Fiscal Policy, which sets the maximum annual amount of investments or donations eligible for 
the tax incentive managed by CoCrea, has approved a larger fiscal quota year after year, signalling positive outcomes.
Source: Colombia QPR, 2024
29
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
The small number of measures developed through 
interministerial cooperation that were designed with 
agencies focused on innovation (just 3%) seems to raise 
questions about another finding, which shows that as many 
as 77% of reporting countries stated in their Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports that ‘creativity and innovation’ are 
recognized in their national sustainable development plans. 
The gulf between these two responses may point to a 
discrepancy in how innovation is understood – particularly 
in a sector inherently driven by imagination and continuous 
creativity versus in other areas of public policy where 
‘innovation’ is typically associated with technological 
advancement. 
While interministerial collaboration is concerned with the 
transversal governance of cultural policy, the practice and 
delivery of the cultural and creative sectors’ activities is 
also context based. Hence, it requires Parties to also have 
decentralized responsibilities for policies and measures that 
promote the cultural and creative sector at subnational, 
municipal and local levels. 
Quadrennial Periodic Report data indicate extensive and 
growing decentralization of responsibilities for policies and 
measures promoting the cultural and creative sector, having 
risen from 79% in the previous reporting period to 90%. 
This trend is also identical across developed and developing 
countries. Examples of new policies in this area include 
Indonesia’s decentralization of cultural responsibilities for 
policy development (Box 1 .3). In Lithuania, ten Regional 
Culture Councils were established (one for each county 
in the country) with the aim to bring the decision-making 
process closer to local communities and create a coordinated 
network of expertise and knowledge. Since the beginning of 
the regional model in 2019, there has been increased trust 
in the Lithuanian Council for Culture as the main funding 
institution in the country for cultural projects, and the 
distribution of the funds has been increasingly democratized.
However, financial pressures can prevent devolved 
administrations from fulfilling their decentralized 
responsibilities. For instance, in the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom), funding for 
culture by local governments has declined sharply over the 
past decade. This has been driven by an equally dramatic 
decline in the overall budget allocations given to local 
governments by the central government, which has led some 
local governments to withdraw entirely from supporting 
cultural provision (Ashton et al., 2024). 
Box 1 .3 •  Indonesia: decentralizing 
responsibilities for policy 
development
Over the past four years, Indonesia has introduced 
a series of policies aimed at decentralizing cultural 
governance by shifting responsibilities to provincial 
and city or regency governments. These measures 
support bottom-up cultural planning, requiring 
each regional government to draft regional cultural 
white papers with community involvement and to 
regularly monitor their implementation. The Special 
Allocated Funds for Culture, managed by the Ministry 
of Education, Culture, Research and Technology, 
now focus solely on programmatic – not physical 
– infrastructure support for museums and cultural 
parks, and their implementation is facilitated by a 
dedicated information system. 
Overall, government affairs in the field of culture are 
classified as mandatory for the central government, 
provincial governments, and city or regency 
governments. In contrast, matters related to the 
creative economy are considered optional, with 
only the central government bearing mandatory 
responsibilities. Provincial governments and city or 
regency governments engage in this area according to 
the potential of their respective regions. These efforts 
contribute to national goals of reforming cultural 
institutions and strengthening the government’s role 
as a cultural facilitator. 
Source: Indonesia QPR, 2024
Direct funding for culture
Measuring the total value of public funding for culture is 
challenging due to a number of factors. For instance, the 
existence of transversal policy making that takes in other 
national government departments and agencies, coupled 
with the existence of public support at lower tiers of 
government, means that obtaining data that capture the full 
extent of public spending on culture is a complicated and 
difficult process. Adding international comparability further 
complicates the picture. 
Data derived from the Quadrennial Periodic Reports on the 
state of public spending on culture, coupled with secondary 
data, highlight recent global trends. The longitudinal 
analysis in Figure 1 .2 shows that, on average, more than 
twice the proportion of gross domestic product (GDP) is 
spent on the cultural and creative sector in developed 
countries compared to developing countries. 
30
Another element of government expenditure is termed 
‘indirect expenditure’ and relates to monies that 
governments forego by offering favourable tax deductions 
for a range of economic activities. These tax deductions 
are offered by governments to incentivize the spending of 
private actors, whether firms or individuals. 
Tax incentives have become a key policy tool in the audio-
visual sector for many countries. Initially targeted at film 
production, these incentives have since expanded to cover 
related activities such as high-end television, visual effects, 
animation and often also computer games. Tax incentives 
– in the form of rebates, tax credits or shelters that return a 
share of qualifying production spending and are typically 
designed to encourage inward investment – work at different 
tiers of government. While some are national in scope, 
many more are decentralized and apply only at province, 
state, region or city level. Data that track these automatic 
incentives suggest that by November 2024, there were 
120 such incentives in operation around the world (Olsberg 
SPI, 2024). While these incentives are particularly frequent 
in Europe and North America, they are an increasing 
feature of audio-visual policy globally. Recent examples 
include Ecuador, where the Law for Digital and Audiovisual 
Transformation (2023) established a comprehensive legal 
framework aimed at modernizing the country through digital 
innovation and support for the audio-visual sector; Mongolia, 
where film production is supported by the recent Regulation 
on Incentives for Foreign and Mongolian Producers (2022), 
Regulation on Non-Repayable Financing from the Film 
Promotion Fund (2022) and the Law on Promotion of 
Cinematography (2021); and Saudi Arabia, where in 2022 
the Saudi Film Commission launched the ‘Film Saudi’ 
cash-rebate programme as a strategic initiative to position 
Saudi Arabia as a global hub for film production (Saudi Film 
Commission, 2024).
The amount of money that these indirect expenditures 
account for can be substantial. For instance, the United 
Kingdom is particularly active at a national level in its 
tax-relief policies for the cultural and creative sector, having 
begun them in 2007 and extended them repeatedly, 
expanding them beyond the audio-visual industries to 
include tax relief for new museum exhibitions and theatre 
productions. Between 2009/2010 and 2022/2023, the 
total value of tax credits in the United Kingdom grew by 
649%. In 2017 to 2018, this indirect expenditure surpassed 
the national culture ministry’s core funding of cultural 
organizations for the first time and has remained far above 
it ever since (Ashton et al., 2024). 
While an increasingly important element of public 
policy and support for the cultural and creative sector 
globally, this form of public expenditure raises important 
questions as to the purpose and impact of public funding. 
Figure 1 .2
Mean government expenditure on 08.2 Cultural 
Services and 08.3 Broadcasting and Publishing Services 
(Classification of the Functions of Government) as a 
percentage of gross domestic product, by developing 
and developed countries (2014-2022)
Source: IMF (2025) / BOP Consulting (2025) 
However, there is evidence that this gap is narrowing. 
In developed countries, the long-term trend since 2014 
has been for expenditure to flatline or decline. The only 
interruption to this was a short-lived uplift in 2020, as 
developed countries sought to protect their cultural sectors 
through the worst period of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
In contrast, in developing countries the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
and United Nations Classification of the Functions of 
Government (COFOG) data show government expenditure on 
culture as a percentage of GDP increasing since 2018. The 
Quadrennial Periodic Report data also provide examples of 
this, such as Botswana, which reported a budget allocation 
increase of nearly 59% for culture and the arts in 2024, in 
recognition of the ‘high potential’ of the sector. The Chema 
Chema Fund was established with US$14.7 million aimed 
at transforming the informal sector and creating more 
employment opportunities. 
Encouraging private sector investment: 
the rise of indirect expenditures
As noted in the previous section, measuring the total value 
of public funding for culture is complicated due to several 
factors. A final element of this complication is that both 
the COFOG data and data reported via the Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports include only direct government expenditure. 
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
0.8%
Global mean
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Developing countries Developed countries
31
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
Tax incentives place governments in a market-facilitating 
role in which the main aim of the incentive is to reduce 
financial barriers and risk for the private sector to invest, 
while maximizing positive externalities (benefits to the 
overall economy rather than the producer). In contrast, 
direct public expenditures are focused on producing 
public cultural goods – such as films, screen content and 
animations – that carry distinctive cultural and social 
value and that the market would not produce on its own, 
or would produce in insufficient quantities. Although 
many countries apply a ‘cultural test’ to tax incentives, 
seeking to channel them into projects that have public 
cultural good characteristics (and that would be aligned 
with the 2005 Convention), the effect of fiscal incentive 
policies is rarely researched from this standpoint, as it is 
more regularly assessed through a narrower economic lens 
(for example, Econometría Consultores, 2022). 
The rise of significant indirect public expenditures 
in culture is in large part a policy response to the 
transformations of the sector over the last 20 years that 
have already been discussed – specifically the increasing 
complexity, technological sophistication, and production 
and distribution costs, as well as the globalized supply 
chains, of many cultural and creative industries. 
However, the use of fiscal incentives in supporting 
the cultural and creative sector should not be at the 
cost of ignoring the possible impact of these policies 
on the diversity of cultural expressions. Relatedly, it is 
also important to flag that production tax incentives 
are not the only way that governments can provide 
financial support to the cultural and creative industries. 
Estonia is an example where the government is using 
a hypothecated tax – a tax whose revenues are set 
aside exclusively for a specific purpose. In this case, 
those funds support the Cultural Endowment, the main 
institution responsible for distributing public funds for 
cultural purposes, alongside the Ministry of Culture. 
The Cultural Endowment receives a percentage of levies 
on tax, gambling and alcohol to fund cultural projects, 
associations and buildings. 
Developing the evidence base
It should go without saying that reliable data, evidence 
and robust information systems are essential to effective 
public policy making. The use of statistics, measurement 
and assessment supports accountability and transparency 
in the use of public funds, enables appraisal of the 
results and effectiveness of policy actions, and is central 
to policy improvement. However, the development and 
sophistication of the data and evidence used in cultural 
policy making typically lags behind most other areas of 
public policy (health, education, welfare, transport, etc.). 
In part, this is driven by the fact that the cultural and 
creative sector represents a much smaller proportion of 
public spending than most other public policy areas, and 
this often drives political priorities. But there are also other 
complicating factors. Collecting cultural statistics, and 
particularly those associated with an expanded notion of 
the cultural and creative sector as an important element 
of contemporary economies, has been a relatively new 
undertaking for all countries. Cultural statistics often 
require considerable technical expertise to extract and 
repurpose from existing official sources, and they often rely 
on goodwill and mutual understanding across different 
offices of government – factors that can be challenging 
even in developed countries. The demand for cultural 
and creative data can seem expensive and hard to justify 
within government budgets, particularly by Parties with 
limited resources, and especially those that cannot already 
demonstrate the potential impact of the creative economy.
Therefore, many Parties have been on a journey of 
constructing cultural statistics from a minimal starting point. 
In the periodic reports, Parties often refer to the coordination 
challenges of collecting and analysing cultural statistics as 
it requires active interministerial coordination. Further issues 
noted in the reports include the lack of, or low level of, basic 
statistical reporting more generally (for example, Cameroon, 
Guatemala, Mongolia, Samoa and Timor-Leste) and the 
unavailability of resources to improve the situation (for 
example, Central African Republic, Mali and Mauritius). 
Nevertheless, there has been considerable progress in Parties 
establishing institutions and responsibilities for collecting 
and maintaining cultural statistics; this share now represents 
81% of countries globally, up from 62% in the previous 
2017-2020 reporting period. Côte d’Ivoire provides a specific 
example, with the Ministry of Culture and Francophonie 
having launched a computerized system for collecting and 
managing cultural statistics. This initiative aims to address 
existing gaps – such as outdated data collection methods, 
lack of trained personnel, and insufficient infrastructure 
– and to continue the production of Cultural Statistics 
Yearbooks. These yearbooks – produced in 2018, 2020 and 
2023 – support better analysis of culture’s economic impact, 
employment trends and the growth of cultural enterprises. 
As a result of this process, Côte d’Ivoire has participated 
in regional workshops to share good practices in cultural 
policy and statistical evaluation systems, providing technical 
assistance to Benin and Togo. This work builds on a 
2017 study on the socio-economic impact of culture on 
development in Côte d’Ivoire, which led to an increase in 
the Ministry’s budget for culture. This shows considerable 
acknowledgement of the intrinsic importance of the cultural 
and creative sector, as well as positive commitment from the 
government to address the problem through the allocation 
of resources, even in those countries with fewer resources. 
32
The advances in collecting cultural statistics are increasingly 
being matched by stronger institutional capacities within 
national statistical offices and cultural ministries to evaluate 
and analyse them. The proportion of Parties globally with 
statistical offices or research bodies that evaluate cultural 
policies is 61%, up from 46% in the previous 2017-2020 
reporting period (Figure 1 .3). While it should be recognized 
that establishing an office or responsibility is merely the first 
step on the journey of providing full reporting on cultural 
statistics, it does bode well for the longer-term construction and 
maintenance of an evidence base for cultural policy making. 
Figure 1 .3
Proportion of Parties with statistical offices or research 
bodies evaluating cultural policies, by developing and 
developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
At the global level, the UNESCO Framework for Cultural 
Statistics (adopted in 1986 and updated in 2009 and 
2025) provides internationally recognized standards for 
cultural statistics and comparable data. The latest 2025 
revision identifies 14 domains1 within the cultural and 
creative ecosystem, delineating them as the ‘statistical 
universe for measuring culture’. It standardizes terminology 
and concepts for a wide range of statistical operations, 
including censuses, surveys, administrative data, big 
data and qualitative methodologies, enabling a deeper 
understanding of the sector’s complexity while reflecting 
national cultural contexts. 
1 . The 14 domains are categorized into two main groups: cultural domains and 
transversal domains, which together recognize the pivotal role of public, private and 
non-profit agents in fostering the development and sustainability of cultural practices. 
The seven cultural domains are 1) cultural and natural heritage, 2) performing arts, 
3) visual arts and crafts, 4) books and press, 5) audio-visual, 6) design and 7) music. 
The seven transversal domains are 8) cultural knowledge, 9) festivals, 10) interactive 
media, and 1 1) cultural governance and management, classified as cultural transversal 
domains; 12) cultural education and 13) cultural tourism, categorized as partial 
cultural domains; and 14) a support domain for multipurpose devices and equipment 
essential for cultural production and dissemination.
61%
38%
46%
79%
51%
61%
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
This update also presents a timely opportunity to revise the 
Monitoring Framework of the 2005 Convention, a process 
initiated in 2025 at the request of its governing bodies.
DEVELOPMENT OF DYNAMIC CULTURAL 
AND CREATIVE SECTORS
Job creation and entrepreneurship support
Reporting on measures related to job creation and support 
for entrepreneurship is a key component of monitoring the 
implementation of the 2005 Convention, offering insight 
into the steps taken to foster a dynamic and adaptable 
cultural and creative sector. 
Within the 2021-2024 Quadrennial Periodic Reports, there 
is an increasing focus on cultural policy on supporting 
employment: the proportion of Parties that report measures 
focused on job creation in the cultural and creative sector 
is now 85%, up from 68% in the previous 2017-2020 
reporting cycle. This is likely in recognition of the significant 
share of total employment now represented by the cultural 
and creative sector in many countries. Using the responses 
from the periodic reports, supplemented with Eurostat 
data from additional countries, a combined dataset of 
61 countries (39 developed, 22 developing) shows that 
the mean share of total employment accounted for by the 
cultural and creative sector was 3.6%. 
As the 2021-2024 reporting cycle overlaps with the 
COVID-19 pandemic, delays in statistical data collection 
and reporting at national levels mean the full impact of the 
pandemic on the cultural workforce is likely not yet reflected 
in the available data. While the immediate impacts of 
pandemic-related restrictions on social gatherings are known 
to have been acute for many in the cultural and creative 
sector workforce, longer term impacts may be apparent in 
future periodic reporting cycles.
The job creation measures most frequently reported by 
Parties encompassed cultural employment as part of a 
broader cultural policy strategy or national development 
plan, followed by access to finance, both at 29% (Figure 1 .4). 
Access to finance measures included publicly provided 
financial assistance to cultural and creative sector businesses 
(for example, debt finance and loan guarantees, such as the 
European Investment Fund’s Cultural and Creative Sectors 
Guarantee Facility), as well as grants designed to improve 
entrepreneurship and support business growth. For instance, 
Chile established a co-financing fund in 2023 to strengthen 
micro and small creative enterprises, with the goal of 
improving their skills, innovation and business performance. 
The outputs of each project are either an early-stage scale-up, 
a prototype or an innovative business model.
33
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
Croatia also reported an initiative that supports the 
development of creative business models across the cultural 
and creative industries through an annual project call. 
The programme, entitled ‘Entrepreneurship in Cultural 
and Creative Industries’, is implemented by the Ministry 
of Culture and Media and represents a revitalized version 
of a scheme originally launched over a decade ago in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Economy, Labour and 
Entrepreneurship. This updated programme aims to 
strengthen the capacity and competitiveness of the cultural 
and creative industries, boost their visibility, and foster new 
networking opportunities.
Figure 1 .4 
Most frequently reported types of job 
creation measures
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Measures reported by Parties for dedicated support 
to the creative sector sometimes overlap with support 
provided through more generic small and medium-sized 
enterprise and innovation policies. For instance, Tunisia 
reports a series of initiatives aimed at creating a dynamic 
environment for startups; it has been in operation since 
2016, and was most recently reiterated in the national 
Digital Transformation Strategy 2021-2025. The Strategy 
includes ‘Startup Invest’, a financing framework that 
includes a startup guarantee fund and an incubator of 
management companies, among other elements. Creative 
startups can be supported through this programme, as 
can those in other sectors. 
In Ecuador, the Organic Law of Culture establishes a 
framework for supporting artistic creation and cultural 
industries within the National Development Plan 
(2017-2021), emphasizing the significance of culture 
in economic development, job creation and the overall 
contribution of GDP , reinforcing the status of arts and 
culture as a priority sector in the economy. Key measures 
include tax deductibility (companies can deduct up to 
8%
8%
26%
29%
29%
Platforms and networks
(including digital)
Formalization measures
Capacity building
Access to /f_inance
Strategies and development plans
150% of cultural investments from their income tax, 
effecting a return of US$1 .50 for every dollar sponsored 
in the cultural sector); zero value-added tax (VAT) on 
artistic services (since 2019, artistic and cultural services 
have been exempt from VAT, with specific guidelines 
for qualifying shows and venues); and foreign-trade tax 
exemptions (which apply to imported goods used for 
artistic purposes by registered cultural entities, aimed at 
bolstering the cultural economy). 
Viet Nam showcased the outcomes of various policies 
and mechanisms introduced under the Decision 
No. 844/QĐ-TTg (2016-2021), including the 
establishment of several startup ecosystem platforms, the 
creation of organizations supporting startup companies, 
the integration of business startups into educational 
programmes, and capacity building for ecosystem actors. 
These efforts paved the way for the adoption of Decision 
No. 188/QĐ-TTg, which aims to foster a more supportive 
environment for innovative startups.
These examples ably demonstrate that part of the 
answer to how to develop policy for dynamic cultural 
and creative sectors is to ensure that they are included 
within mainstream economic development and innovation 
funding. Once again, this underlines the importance 
of interministerial collaboration and transversal policy 
making. Collaboration with different departments and 
offices of government helps to crowd in resources to the 
cultural and creative sector, as well as bringing with it 
different expertise and capacity. 
Lastly, as reported in several of the periodic reports, 
an important concern across many countries is the 
formalization of cultural and creative sector activities 
to bring them within the remit of the formal economy 
and governance. Such measures often include 
professionalization, accreditation or certification for 
cultural practitioners. In Bolivia, for example, a specific 
government agency has been created for this purpose: the 
Vice Ministry of Micro, Small Businesses and Handicrafts. 
It facilitates access to credit, public procurement, technical 
assistance and market opportunities, with a particular 
emphasis on community and cooperative enterprises, in 
sectors like textiles and leather, with the ultimate aim of 
integrating the micro, small, and artisanal workforce and 
enterprises into national economic strategies. 
34
Box 1 .4 • Clustering and creative hubs 
A substantial body of international policy and research 
evidence indicates that geographical clusters and 
creative districts of cultural assets and actors – their 
grouping together within a given geographic area, or 
even within the same building – are associated with 
multiple benefits (Gill et al., 2019; Pratt, 2021). These 
include enhanced skills formation and the development 
of specialized local labour markets (UNESCO and UNDP , 
2013), knowledge sharing and greater innovation 
(Jang et al., 2017) as well as stronger firm performance 
(Tao et al., 2019). 
While clustering in the cultural and creative industries 
can happen organically over time, many successful 
clusters and cultural districts have additionally 
benefited from supportive, sustained and coordinated 
policy actions (BOP Consulting and KRIHS, 2019). 
The 2021-2024 Quadrennial Periodic Reports provide 
examples of policy interventions of this kind. For 
example, Parties have reported initiatives applying 
the concept of clustering across an expanding range 
of sectors. In Viet Nam, creative hubs constitute a 
pillar of the country’s strategy to foster creativity 
and innovation, shaping a dynamic ecosystem 
that bridges creative, educational and business 
communities. In Qatar, Media City was established 
to serve as a hub for innovation in the media and 
digital communication sectors. In Kenya, the Talanta 
Hela Digital Hub, launched in 2023, aims to ‘identify, 
recruit, nurture, and monetize’ talent in the sports 
and creative sectors. In South Africa, the DSAC 
(Department of Sport, Arts and Culture) Publishing 
Hub was created to support the growth of local 
publishing and literature, resulting in 2024 in the 
writing and publication of 21 new books and the 
translation of four titles into braille.
Clustering can also have benefits for audiences, and 
cultural consumption and participation. Examples of 
policy supporting clustering of cultural infrastructure 
from the 2021-2024 Quadrennial Periodic Reports 
include the construction of a library and archive 
complex in Ethiopia, and Tunisia’s Cité de la Culture, 
a nine-hectare site bringing together cultural assets in 
music, opera, ballet, choreography, theatre, performing 
arts and literature.
Source: Ethiopia QPR, 2024; Kenya QPR, 2024; Qatar QPR, 2024; South Africa 
QPR, 2024; Tunisia QPR, 2024; Viet Nam QPR, 2024; Gill et al., 2019; Pratt, 
2021; UNESCO and UNDP , 2013; Jang et al., 2017; Tao et al., 2019; BOP 
Consulting and KRIHS, 2019
Self-employment and micro-enterprises: 
flexibility and precarity
Designing business support for cultural enterprises can be 
difficult, particularly as most businesses in the cultural sector 
are either micro-enterprises – with a handful of workers – or 
freelance self-employed professionals. In the EU, where the 
most recent data is available, almost one-third (31 .7%) of 
cultural workers were self-employed in 2024, compared 
to an average of 13.6% in the whole economy (Eurostat, 
2025). Micro-enterprises have fewer resources to dedicate to 
both social support and business support. Self-employment 
has many positive aspects such as flexibility, but it also has 
downsides in terms of social and economic sustainability. 
Furthermore, it leaves industries and workers vulnerable to 
‘coordination’ issues where labour markets and business 
transactions do not operate fluidly. Self-employment can cut 
off workers from the social support mechanisms provided 
in workplaces, leaving them reliant upon social networks 
to navigate the labour market and limiting their access to 
financial resources.
An area of concern for cultural and creative sector policy 
makers has been the precarity of work in the sector, in 
part due to high levels of non-standard forms of work 
(self-employment, part-time, secondary and intermittent 
employment). Countries such as France have intervened 
historically via policies that mitigate the problems of 
intermittent work patterns and payment for cultural sector 
workers. However, there is a wider concern with the relative 
lack of social benefits (compared to other sectors of the 
economy), such as pensions, childcare and sick pay that 
cultural workers can access (an issue explored in more detail 
in Chapter 10). These issues came to wider attention during 
the COVID-19 pandemic when business and job-continuity 
was compromised for all, but it also highlighted the intrinsic 
challenges that intermittent work in the cultural and creative 
sector manifests. This wider issue of lack of social support 
services for cultural workers was mentioned in reports by 
Austria, Côte d’Ivoire, Estonia, Jordan, Madagascar, Peru 
and Slovenia. 
Not only does this fact affect current workers but it also 
dissuades new entrants, the cultural and creative sector 
workforce of the future. The idea of a basic income 
for artists has been the subject of an experimental 
initiative in Ireland (Box 1 .5) and underpins thinking 
about a more sustainable pattern of cultural work. The 
Irish example offers an interesting test case for a ‘Basic 
Income for the Arts’ model. It emerged not only in 
response to the COVID-19 crisis but also from the deeper 
reflections contained in A Life Worth Living: The Report 
of the Arts and Culture Recovery Taskforce (Arts and 
Culture Recovery Taskforce, 2020), which examined the 
challenges of supporting and sustaining artistic careers. 
35
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
This issue has become even more pressing given the 
widespread concerns about AI companies using the 
copyrighted works of artists without compensation (an issue 
explored in more detail in Chapter 3).
Such initiatives in Ireland and elsewhere that look to 
address some of the current structural labour market 
challenges of the cultural and creative sector represent 
a significant shift within cultural policy – from a 
dominant concern regarding cultural forms and audience 
experiences, to one that recognizes the interdependencies 
of the whole cultural ecosystem, and the situatedness 
of cultural workers in communities and families. Clearly, 
if the cultural sector is to be sustainable, independent 
cultural workers should be able to pursue careers that 
offer fair and equal opportunities and allow them to 
secure a dignified livelihood. 
Box 1 .5 • Ireland: basic income for the arts
Ireland’s Basic Income for the Arts Pilot Scheme, 
launched in 2022, provides 2,000 artists and creative 
workers with a weekly income of 325 euros for three 
years. Emerging from the Arts and Culture Recovery 
Taskforce report during the COVID-19 crisis, A Life 
Worth Living: The Report of the Arts and Culture 
Recovery Taskforce, the scheme aims to give artists 
stability to focus on their practice, test the viability 
of self-employment, and reduce reliance on social 
protection support. Developed through sector-wide 
consultation and international research, it represents a 
pioneering effort to address precarity in the arts while 
informing future government policy.
In October 2025, the Irish Government announced that 
the scheme would become permanent, with between 
2,000 and 2,200 beneficiaries to be selected in 2026. 
The decision took into account the positive assessment 
made of the pilot project, in terms of artists’ ability to 
devote more time to their creative practice, improved 
economic situation, and reduced levels of anxiety or 
depression. Furthermore, a cost-benefit analysis showed 
that society received 1 .39 euros in return for every 
1 euro of public money invested in the scheme. 
Source: Ireland QPR, 2024; Dagg, 2025
Copyright: securing a business model for creators
Intellectual Property 2 offers a clear illustration of how 
formalization supports more resilient business models in 
the creative sector. Intellectual Property rights, especially 
copyright, are important to creators in two ways. First, 
they identify a work as an original creation belonging 
to a creator, giving them the right to prevent derogatory 
changes to the work (‘moral rights’). Second, copyright is 
an economic right that entitles the creator to exclusively 
profit from their creations. 
In both senses, this requires legal recognition concerning 
the protection of Intellectual Property and copyright, and a 
method and institution to collect and redistribute earnings. 
Central to the second action is the role of collective 
management organizations (CMOs). These organizations 
are typically non-profit entities that act as intermediaries 
for authors, artists and other rights holders, licensing 
their rights to users (for example, broadcasters) and 
collecting royalties the copyright owners are due from the 
transaction. Without their existence, it is much harder for 
individual artists and creators to benefit financially from the 
Intellectual Property that they create through their work. 
As Table 1 .1 shows, there is a lack of effective and 
functioning CMOs in many regions and countries. There 
is also particularly poor coverage of such organizations 
outside the realm of music, and even music’s reach is on 
average just over two-thirds of Parties in 2025. 
Ineffective – or inefficient – CMOs, or a lack of public 
respect for copyright, make it difficult to operate a creative 
enterprise that is based on Intellectual Property and 
copyright. Building trust and understanding of Intellectual 
Property and copyright systems takes time, and operating 
CMOs across all domains can be expensive. However, with 
digitization this cost is falling. For example, the Mexican 
National Institute of Copyright (Indautor) launched 
in 2022 the online platform INDARELÍN, which stands 
for Indautor en línea (Indautor online), to simplify and 
modernize the process of registering literary and artistic 
works. Artists and creators can complete the registration 
process entirely online, uploading a copy of the work and 
receiving an official registration certificate digitally. This 
online service is supported by ongoing efforts to promote 
and raise awareness of copyright. 
2. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, ‘Intellectual Property (IP) 
refers to creations of the mind, such as inventions; literary and artistic works; designs; 
and symbols, names and images used in commerce. IP is protected in law by, for 
example, patents, copyright and trademarks, which enable people to earn recognition 
or financial benefit from what they invent or create. By striking the right balance 
between the interests of innovators and the wider public interest, the IP system aims 
to foster an environment in which creativity and innovation can flourish’ (https://
www.wipo.int/en/web/about-ip).
36
The use of the web led to a significant increase 
in online registration of works, surpassing other 
registration methods. Between 2019 and 2023, over 
212,700 works were registered. Additionally, outreach 
activities helped strengthen advocacy and the 
protection of copyright and related rights. However, 
once again, policies and monitoring need to focus on 
these detailed subdomains if comprehensive progress 
is to be made visible.
Box 1 .6 illustrates an initiative to promote and support 
Intellectual Property and copyright holders based 
on creating knowledge of, and respect for, copyright 
protection. Again, this highlights how capacity 
building in cultural fields can be complex and must 
be tailored to a particular art form, place and history. 
The challenge is not simply legislative support, nor 
even institution building to facilitate a financial 
redistribution model. It also involves changing the 
everyday practice of consumers. For successful creative 
work and businesses, all these three components must 
be deployed and made to work together.
Box 1 .6 •  Cabo Verde and Rwanda: 
the Copyright Label project
The Copyright Friendly Label project, launched in 2019 by 
the International Confederation of Societies of Authors and 
Composers in Cabo Verde as a pilot country on the African 
continent, aimed to promote copyright compliance as an 
economic and cultural asset. Implemented through the local 
collective management organization Sociedade Cabo-verdiana 
de Música (Cape Verdean Music Society), the initiative began 
in Santa Maria on the island of Sal, which became the world’s 
first city to receive the Copyright Friendly Seal. Managed by a 
steering committee involving national and local authorities, 
the label rewards cities and users who pay royalties, helping 
them position themselves as trusted partners to creators. 
The programme gained traction across Cabo Verde and saw 
its broader success when the 2024 African Cup of Nations 
incorporated copyright licensing for stadium and fan zone 
music through the Ivorian collective management organization 
BURIDA. The initiative’s reach extended to Rwanda, where the 
Kigali Triennial and Rwanda Arts Initiative were also recognized, 
solidifying the label’s role in supporting creative industries and 
responsible cultural tourism across Africa.
Source: CISAC, 2024
Table 1 .1
Percentage of Parties with collective management organizations and reproduction rights organizations 
across cultural domains, by region and by developing and developed countries
Any domain AGP* Audio-visual Dramatic Literary Musical
Developing and developed countries
Developing countries 65% 23% 24% 40% 23% 62%
Developed countries 82% 68% 62% 40% 74% 78%
Global total 71% 38% 36% 40% 40% 68%
Region
Western European and North American States 96% 75% 67% 50% 92% 96%
Eastern European States 96% 46% 58% 46% 63% 96%
Latin American and Caribbean States 72% 34% 22% 31% 34% 69%
Asian and Pacific States 50% 31% 19% 0% 38% 44%
African States 61% 29% 32% 34% 46% 56%
Arab States 36% 0% 14% 21% 29% 29%
Global total 71% 38% 36% 40% 40% 68%
*AGP stands for arts graphiques et plastiques and covers visual arts, photography and graphic design
Source: CISAC (2025) / BIEM (2025) / IFRRO (2025) / BOP Consulting (2025)
37
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
Education and vocational training:  
from STEM to STEAM
Educational and vocational training are key factors and 
reliable predictors of the vitality of the cultural and 
creative sector in any given territory. In the last decade, 
there has been a global shift in higher and further 
education towards ‘STEM’ subjects (science, technology, 
engineering and maths), as opposed to arts, humanities 
and social sciences. For example, between 2015 and 
2018, the uptake of humanities subjects at bachelor, 
master’s and doctoral levels declined in 24 of the 36 OECD 
countries (Goldstein, 2021). While policy makers justify this 
focus on STEM by pointing to technological change and its 
economic potential, this emphasis risks sidelining the value 
of cultural education, which also contributes significantly 
to social, cultural and economic development. Arts and 
culture rely heavily on humanities graduates, and without 
cultural education, both production and engagement 
with the arts decline. Worryingly, there has been a global 
decline of 10.67% in the share of arts and humanities 
graduates across the OECD countries over the decade 
from 2013 to 2023, even as the share of STEM graduates 
increased by 4.12% (OECD, 2024b). 
However, the relationship between arts and science-based 
education is not an either/or choice: they are increasingly 
seen as complementary. This recognition has been referred 
to as the STEAM or STE(A)M education approach (science, 
technology, engineering, arts and maths). For example, 
Cyprus has integrated a STEAM-based curriculum into 
educational workshops, aiming to foster both social 
and technological skills among Cypriot youth. At Youth 
Makerspace Larnaka, this curriculum played a key role 
in allowing youth participants to develop and launch 
technology-driven business projects.
At one level, this shift in thinking is associated with the 
transversal culturalization of all forms of economic and 
industrial production – where design and aesthetics, as 
well as cultural difference and identity, have become as 
important, if not more, than simply price signals. On another 
level, it is being driven by the increasing technological 
sophistication and complexity of the cultural and creative 
industries themselves. Computer games have, for some time, 
been the cultural industry subsector that generates the 
greatest revenues, and making computer games requires 
STEAM: an integration of storytelling and artwork with 
coding skills and mindsets. This is even more pronounced in 
the emerging area of immersive audio-visual products and 
experiences that use creative artificial and virtual reality, 
as well as virtual production technologies and large-scale 
LED technologies. Such technologies are used increasingly 
in major live event and theatrical productions as the 
centrepiece of new cultural experiences. 
Seeking to capitalize on the momentum of this rapidly 
expanding creative sector, several Parties to the 
2005 Convention have integrated gaming into their 
national cultural and digital strategies. The growth of 
this field, rooted in both technology and art, however, 
requires training, capacity building, and the strengthening 
of professional networks. In Uruguay, the Ministry of 
Industry, Energy and Mining established the Video Games 
Roundtable to formalize collaboration among national 
stakeholders – including the Ministry of Education, 
the Film and Audiovisual Agency of Uruguay, and the 
Technological Laboratory of Uruguay – demonstrating 
a coordinated, cross-sectoral approach to developing 
the creative economy. In Chile, the Centre for the 
Technological Revolution in Creative Industries, supported 
by the Production Development Corporation, was 
established to strengthen technological infrastructure 
and drive innovation. With funding secured until 2030, 
the Centre has already trained more than 100 cultural 
professionals in the use of Unreal Engine, a 3D creation 
and video game design software. 
The applicability of gaming-related skills extends well 
beyond the entertainment industry: in Germany, for 
example, the Film and Media Foundation of North Rhine-
Westphalia launched a ‘gamification’ programme in 2023 
to explore the educational and social uses of video game 
tools, supporting the development of projects in urban 
planning, environmental awareness and civic engagement. 
These varied initiatives illustrate how gaming has become 
a catalyst for innovation, skill development and transversal 
collaboration.
Recognizing the complementarity between STEM and the 
arts has created a renewed respect for cultural education 
in the increasingly digitized world. Indeed, a recent 
modification to the Programme for International Student 
Assessment test has sought to include measures of 
creativity (OECD, 2024a). Likewise, organizations such as 
the World Economic Forum have highlighted how creative 
skills (however defined) are critical in the current and 
future workplace (WEF, 2019). All these trends suggest 
that cultural and arts education is not just a ‘nice to have’ 
skill, but rather a socio-economically vital one.
Looking more closely at education and training in the 
cultural and creative sector, there has been a significant 
shift since the previous periodic reporting period in 2017-
2020. While the proportion of Parties offering tertiary 
and university education degrees in cultural and creative 
sectors is unchanged at 83%, the proportion of Parties 
reporting existing technical and vocational education 
and training (TVET) programmes in cultural and creative 
sector-relevant fields has risen from 76% to 93% 
(Figure 1 .5).
38
Figure 1 .5 
Proportion of Parties with education and training 
programmes, by type
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
In the sector, TVET is often used to meet labour market 
shortages in the technical and production workforce 
(encompassing roles related to lighting, sound, video and 
image production) as well as in the teaching of crafts and 
trades. For example, China’s Culture and Entertainment 
Industry Association has collaborated with government 
agencies and universities to set up a vocational skills 
training and accreditation system to improve on-the-
job skills and develop career pathways for practitioners 
in music and performing arts entertainment, gaming, 
e-sports, and location-based experiences.
Almost two-thirds of Parties to the 2005 Convention 
reported ‘digital literacy programmes for creation and 
experimentation’ (63%), a significant 14 percentage point 
increase from the previous reporting cycle. This growth 
reflects the cultural and creative sector’s adaptability 
to technological change accelerated by the COVID-19 
pandemic and showing no signs of slowing. While this rise 
is to be welcomed, greater coverage of digital education 
programmes will be increasingly needed over the next 
reporting period if Parties wish to meet the creative labour 
force needs generated by digitalization, and particularly 
the rapid development of Generative AI (Chapter 3 
explores in greater details the needs for skills development 
in the digital environment). 
The recent Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural 
expressions in the digital environment made two 
interconnected recommendations in this sense: it 
recommended that Parties implement national digital-
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
49%
76%
83%
63%
93%
83%
Digital literacy
programmes
for creation and
experimentation
Technical and
vocational
education and
training programmes
Tertiary and
university
education degrees
culture capacity plans to enhance digital literacy and AI 
skills among cultural actors (Recommendation 7) and 
that Parties update their arts education curricula and 
methodologies to incorporate comprehensive training on 
AI technologies for both students and educators, with 
a particular focus on arts schools and higher education 
institutions specializing in the arts (Recommendation 8) 
(UNESCO, 2025). Additionally, a key objective of the 
UNESCO Framework for Culture and Arts Education is to 
support countries to benefit from the opportunities opened 
up by technology and promote reflection, creativity, 
initiatives, and ethical and responsible use in this domain 
(UNESCO, 2024).
While education and training programmes in the cultural 
and creative sector remain available across most Parties, 
significant disparities exist between cultural domains 
and types of programmes (Figures 1 .6 and 1 .7). In recent 
years, most cultural and creative domains monitored 
through the Convention’s periodic reporting mechanism 
have experienced a notable decline in the university-level 
educational offerings: media arts dropped from 83% 
to 71%, music from 89% to 73%, performing arts from 
83% to 77%, and visual arts from 92% to 78%. The 
publishing sector – once well supported through formal 
university programmes and TVET – has experienced a 
steep decline, dropping from 87% to 60% in tertiary 
education and from 74% to 63% in TVET, making it 
the least supported in terms of both tertiary education 
and TVET. This decrease is likely due to budget cuts or 
shifting priorities that have disadvantaged what could 
be considered traditional creative sectors. Although the 
exact reason remains unclear, the drop warrants attention 
and continued monitoring.
Although training in cultural management has shown 
modest growth – rising to 65% for both academic and 
TVET offerings from 59% and 62% respectively during 
the 2017-2020 monitoring period – it remains the second 
least supported field after publishing. This indicates that 
an important training gap persists. This field requires 
specialized expertise to effectively manage and govern 
the cultural and creative sector, yet only limited training 
opportunities exist. 
In contrast, cinema and audio-visual arts stands out as 
a domain that has seen significant growth, reversing 
previous trends. Once among the domains with the lowest 
university-level offering (62%) – despite being the most 
frequently targeted by policies and measures in periodic 
reports – the field now benefits from 74% coverage in 
tertiary education and 78% in TVET. 
39
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
From gaps to growth: capacity building
The ability of artists and creators to understand how to 
make a living from their work – such as understanding how 
to price their time or work, how to deploy their skills in other 
sectors, how the Intellectual Property and copyright systems 
function, and what they need to do in order to protect and 
exploit their Intellectual Property – is another important 
dimension in ensuring a dynamic creative and cultural 
ecosystem. Reports in relation to the 1980 Recommendation 
concerning the Status of the Artist show that globally, 82% 
of the UNESCO Member States reported having put in place 
capacity-building initiatives that support artists to monetize 
their work (Figure 1 .8). The proportion of developing 
countries reporting these measures (85%) is greater than 
that of developed countries (79%). This could be reflective 
of the additional training required where supporting 
infrastructure (that is, CMOs) is weaker.
Several converging factors may have contributed to this 
progress: the sector’s strategic importance reflected in 
policy attention, rapid technological advancements driving 
demand for audio-visual content, and increased scrutiny 
following the #MeToo movement, which highlighted 
systemic issues within the industry. Together, these 
developments appear to have prompted educational 
institutions to expand their offerings in this field. 
Design is another domain that stands out, with TVET 
programme offerings rising significantly – from 58% to 
79%. While the number of Parties offering university-level 
programmes has remained relatively stable, more countries 
have expanded their TVET options to include design. This 
shift may reflect the growing importance of visual content, 
particularly in digital and online environments. 
Figure 1 .6
Proportion of Parties reporting tertiary and university 
education degrees, by cultural domain
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
92%
87%
83%
89%
83%
72%
59%
62%
78%
60%
77%
73%
71%
74%
65%
74%
Visual arts
Publishing
Performing arts
Music
Media arts
Design
Cultural
management
Cinema/
Audio-visual arts
Figure 1 .7
Proportion of Parties reporting technical and vocational 
education and training programmes, by cultural domain
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
87%
74%
86%
82%
69%
58%
62%
60%
86%
63%
80%
85%
74%
79%
65%
78%
Visual arts
Publishing
Performing arts
Music
Media arts
Design
Cultural
management
Cinema/
Audio-visual arts
40
Figure 1 .8
Proportion of UNESCO Member States with policies, 
measures or programmes that provide artists capacity 
building, training or other support to monetize their 
artistic work, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (1980 Recommendation)
However, ‘capacity building’ encompasses a much broader 
range of activity than copyright and monetization training, 
covering technical, digital, management and entrepreneurship 
skills across all areas of the cultural and creative sector. 
While closely related to education and vocational training, it 
typically focuses on professionals working in, or adjacent to, 
the cultural and creative sector, as opposed to potential new 
entrants. In the context of this chapter, capacity building is 
also characterized by its punctual nature and strong focus on 
strategic skills for institutional development, and policy design 
and implementation. 
For example, data from the periodic reports show that 
Türkiye’s cultural management capacity-building programme 
targets those working in local government, including those 
in cultural tourism, youth, sports or urban planning roles, 
with the aim of improving the effectiveness of devolved 
management of cultural projects and services. In Brazil, 
the National Arts Foundation runs a capacity-building 
programme for artists and technicians in the performing 
arts to strengthen and enhance the sector’s production 
capabilities, while in Canada, the ‘ AcceleratiON’ programme 
offers mentorship and capacity-building support targeted at 
Black and Indigenous-owned music businesses, to address 
structural inequalities in the sector. 
While these are just a few examples, capacity building 
represents a significant proportion of the policy making 
approaches used by the Parties to support and develop the 
cultural and creative sectors. Across almost 1 ,000 measures 
reported through the Quadrennial Periodic Reports under 
the monitoring area ‘cultural and creative sectors’, over 30% 
are related to funding, capacity building or development 
programmes for artists (Figure 1 .9). This is reflective of 
the centrality of human capital to value generation in 
the cultural and creative sector: countries recognize that 
investing in the sector means investing in its people.
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
85%
79%
82%
Box 1 .7 •  Ethiopia: digital capacity-building 
workshop 
The Ethiopian Women Visual Artist Association, 
in collaboration with UNESCO and the Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency, hosted 
a one-day intensive workshop aimed at empowering 
50 professional Ethiopian women visual artists. The 
workshop focused on equipping participants with 
essential skills and knowledge to navigate the evolving 
digital art landscape while promoting gender equality 
in the cultural and creative sectors. Key themes included 
the exploration of new art mediums and digitization, 
strategies for strengthening the digital presence of 
women artists, and insights into the digital art market, 
including the use of non-fungible tokens (NFTs). This 
initiative marked a significant step towards increasing 
visibility, opportunity and support for Ethiopian women 
artists in the global digital art space.
Source: Ethiopia QPR, 2024
Figure 1 .9 
Most frequently reported types of policy-making tools 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
0.4%
0.9%
0.9%
1.6%
2.6%
2.7%
2.8%
3.3%
9.1%
9.2%
13.1%
21.4%
31.7%
Digital infrastructure
Other
Taskforce or expert group
Network or digital platform
Fiscal policy
Dialogue mechanisms
Built infrastructure
Research and evaluation
Regulatory framework
or sector-speci/f_ic law
Creation, transformation
or strengthening of
a culture sector public body
Events and festivals
Government policy or strategy
Funding, capacity building,
access, or artist development
programmes
41
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
For Parties to the Convention
 ¡ Develop robust regulatory frameworks that 
enable interministerial cooperation in areas that 
directly involve the cultural and creative sector or 
affect culture professionals and access to culture. 
Collaboration should include ministries or agencies 
responsible for culture, education, foreign affairs, 
labour, trade, economy and business, finance, 
and related domains, aligning with growing 
interministerial cooperation trends.
 ¡ Substantially increase direct public funding for culture, 
to reverse the global decline in investment and reduce 
the gap between developing and developed countries, 
especially as developing countries are beginning to 
increase their cultural expenditure while levels in 
developed countries have stagnated or declined. 
 ¡ Carefully assess the purpose and impact of indirect 
public expenditure through fiscal incentives to ensure 
that these incentives support, rather than undermine, 
the diversity of cultural expressions. 
 ¡ Invest in information systems and institutional 
capacities in national statistical offices and cultural 
ministries to ensure continuous collection and analysis 
of cultural statistics for evidence-based cultural policy 
making, and to address recurrent challenges such as 
limited statistical expertise, reporting and resources. 
 ¡ Support the formalization of cultural and creative sector 
activities to integrate them into the formal economy, 
governance frameworks, and mainstream economic 
development and innovation funding. 
 ¡ Address the persistent precarity of work in the cultural 
and creative sector through policies targeting non-
standard forms of employment and limited access 
to social benefits. Support initiatives that promote 
sustainable livelihoods for independent cultural 
workers, including those who are self-employed or 
engage in intermittent work.
 ¡ Establish and ensure the effective functioning of 
collective management organizations (CMOs) across 
creative domains, and promote public respect for 
Intellectual Property and copyright through coordinated 
legislation, capacity building, and public awareness 
measures. Digitization offers opportunities to improve 
CMO efficiency, particularly in certain domains and 
regions where coverage is limited or fragmented. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 ¡ Monitor and reassess education and training 
opportunities in the cultural and creative sector, as 
declining numbers of university-level programmes risk 
impoverishing the diversity of cultural expressions, 
widening training gaps, and weakening local, national 
and regional cultural production. Integrate culture and 
arts education in both cultural and educational policies, 
aligned with the UNESCO Framework for Culture and 
Arts Education, and respond to shifts in tertiary and 
TVET offerings and rising demand for digital literacy. 
 ¡ Give greater recognition to STEAM education 
approaches (science, technology, engineering, arts 
and maths), as arts and science-based education 
complement each other and strengthen social, cultural 
and economic development. 
 ¡ Expand digital education programmes to meet the 
needs of a digitalization-driven creative workforce, 
particularly in the context of Generative AI, and 
ensure that specialized arts schools provide 
foundational digital skills.
For UNESCO
 ¡ Continue supporting Parties in developing, monitoring 
and evaluating cultural policies that respond to current 
needs and rapid sectoral transformations, including by 
facilitating integration with education, labour, trade, 
innovation and other relevant policy areas.
 ¡ Continue assisting Parties in establishing effective 
cultural information systems that align with the 
Convention’s Monitoring Framework and the updated 
UNESCO Framework for Cultural Statistics, as reliable 
data and statistical capacity remain uneven across 
Parties.
 ¡ Build capacity in developing countries to support 
artists to monetize their work, compensating for weaker 
institutional infrastructure including limited coverage 
and effectiveness of CMOs beyond the music sector. 
 ¡ Seize the opportunity of the Convention’s 20th 
anniversary and the 2027 global reporting deadline 
to reinforce monitoring mechanisms and enhance 
knowledge products and tools, to better inform policy 
making from local to international levels and improve 
Parties’ reporting capacities. 
 ¡ Strengthen inter-agency relations by supporting 
sustainable cultural exchanges, co-creation processes 
and cooperation between actors across regions. Build 
on the growing integration of culture into multilateral 
frameworks at regional and international levels.
© Anna Ridler/Photographer: Emily Grundon, 
2018, installation of Myriad (Tulips)*
43
Chapter 2
Reconfiguring 
media diversity
Audrey Yue
© Anna Ridler/Photographer: Emily Grundon, 
2018, installation of Myriad (Tulips)*
44
Many Parties have introduced funding and legal measures 
to strengthen local, Indigenous and minority-language 
media and improve representation of vulnerable groups.
 ¡ Investment in the digital transition of public service and 
community media is growing. Countries increasingly 
support the shift from analogue to digital broadcasting, 
the development of online platforms for regional content, 
and training for media professionals in new technologies 
and digital media. 
 ¡ Regulatory reforms and collective efforts, especially with civil 
society, have strengthened frameworks for media ownership 
and oversight, supporting media independence and plurality.
 ¡ While overall monitoring of the media has increased, 
coverage remains uneven across different areas of oversight. 
According to Quadrennial Periodic Report data, 72% of 
Parties have regulatory authorities monitoring diversity in 
media ownership, but only 50% monitor gender equality 
in the media and 57% monitor editorial independence.
 ¡ Monitoring media content in the digital environment 
has become a global priority. The share of Parties with 
mechanisms to monitor online media rose from 54% 
in 2017-2020 to 76% in 2021-2024, reflecting greater 
awareness of the risks associated with digital media.
 ¡ Media accountability models are evolving in the digital 
environment. New regulations are emerging to improve 
transparency around how digital platforms mediate access 
and recommend content. As media systems become more 
digital, traditional accountability instruments (press councils, 
codes of ethics) are facing challenges in adapting. 
 ¡ Developing countries are more likely to require content 
diversity in regional and local broadcasting (90% 
compared to 84% in developed countries), which requires 
producing localized content for multiple linguistic and 
cultural communities. By contrast, linguistic diversity in 
media programming is higher in developed countries (89% 
compared to 83% in developing countries), with stronger 
policy frameworks that require multilingual broadcasting.
 ¡ Domestic content regulations for audio-visual media are 
expanding globally. The share of Parties with domestic 
content quotas rose from 68% in 2017-2020 to 80% in 
2021-2024, reflecting growing efforts to safeguard cultural 
and linguistic diversity. However, significant differences 
remain between developed and developing countries.
 ¡ Only 24% of Parties have content quotas for subscription 
video-on-demand services, compared to 47% for free-to-air 
television. The gap is especially prominent in developing 
nations, where only 5% have subscription video-on-demand 
regulations, compared with 62% of developed nations.
 ¡ As framed by the 2005 Convention, media diversity refers 
both to the availability of varied cultural content and 
to the presence of public, private and community-based 
media that reflect a plurality of cultural expressions and 
perspectives. It requires a media landscape with diverse 
types of media ownership and outlets, as well as the 
inclusion and representation of different social, cultural and 
linguistic groups in media content. 
 ¡ Growing concentration of media ownership, the decline of 
independent and local outlets, and the homogenization of 
content are undermining diversity in the media ecosystem. 
These trends also weaken public trust in media institutions. 
 ¡ Media freedom is in global decline. The number of countries 
scoring zero on media freedom has tripled since 2005. This 
decline is fuelled by economic instability, concentrated media 
ownership and the growing influence of dominant digital 
media conglomerates – all pressures that erode editorial 
independence and limit media diversity. This decline was 
exacerbated by a 38% increase in journalist killings in 2022 
and 2023 compared to the previous two years.
 ¡ The number of UNESCO Member States with right to 
information laws has grown significantly, reaching 139 in 
2025. However, this positive momentum is counterbalanced 
in some countries by developments that weaken responsible 
bodies for oversight and accountability. 
 ¡ After 30 years of media monitoring, women make up only 
26% of news subjects and sources. This figure has plateaued 
since 2010, showing stalled progress towards gender parity.
 ¡ The consolidation of digital platforms and media outlets 
risks reducing the range of available content and distribution 
channels. It also may further marginalize independent and 
minority voices, while favouring commercially driven content. 
 ¡ Local media is foundational for civic engagement, social 
cohesion and democratic accountability. It provides space 
for diverse viewpoints and independent cultural expression. 
While digital platforms and social media are widely used 
to access information and content, they should not entirely 
replace the institutional role of traditional outlets, which 
are, however, weakening due to growing economic pressures 
and media consolidation. In response, Parties have adopted 
regulatory and financial mechanisms, including targeted 
funding, to sustain the operations of diverse media outlets.
 ¡ Support for public service media and cultural diversity 
is growing, particularly in developing countries. The 
share of developing countries with public service media 
mandated to promote cultural diversity rose from 
84% in 2017-2020 to 99% in 2021-2024, reflecting 
a growing commitment to pluralistic media systems. 
KEY FINDINGS
45
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
84% ➞ 99%
Developing countries report having 
public service media mandated to 
promote cultural diversity
68% ➞ 80%
Countries report domestic content quotas 
for audio-visual media, signalling increased 
support for local media ecosystems 
Digital media consolidation 
is contributing to:
 ¡ Erosion of media pluralism 
 ¡ Algorithmic-driven echo chambers and 
reduced content discoverability
 ¡ Misinformation and weaker 
editorial safeguards
Only 26% of news subjects and sources are women 
– momentum towards gender parity has stalled
Only 24% of countries have domestic 
content quotas for subscription 
video-on-demand services
Monitoring of media remains 
unbalanced across areas of oversight 
– only 50% of countries monitor 
gender equality and 57% editorial 
independence 
Media diversity in the digital environment 
is a growing focus of policy making
54% ➞ 76% Countries have mechanisms 
monitoring media content in the digital environment
 ¡ Investments are increasing in the digital transition 
of public service and community media 
 ¡ New regulations are emerging to improve 
transparency of content recommendation systems
Approaches to content diversity 
in programming vary globally
 ¡ Developing countries report 
more mandates for regional 
and/or local broadcasters 
 ¡ Developed countries 
often report mandates on 
linguistic diversity
Freedom to operate 
without government 
control or censorship
Plurality of media outlets 
and ownership models (public, 
private and community media)
Diverse content representing 
different social, cultural 
and linguistic groups
A diverse media landscape encompasses:
Countries are implementing regulatory 
and financial measures to:
 ¡ Ensure the sustainability of local, Indigenous 
and minority-language media outlets
 ¡ Provide training for local media professionals, 
including from vulnerable groups 
 ¡ Strengthen media accountability and 
compliance with service obligations for diverse 
socio-cultural programming
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
46
INTRODUCTION
The media shapes our perceptions of the world as much 
by the stories it tells as by the people who tell them. 
Initiatives like andererseits (On the Other Hand), an 
independent media outlet in Austria, demonstrate how the 
media can actively promote inclusion and representation. 
Founded in 2020 as a digital magazine, andererseits  
drives socially relevant stories that reflect the full diversity 
of human experience, especially the perspectives of 
people with disabilities who remain significantly under-
represented in newsrooms, using plain-language writing 
and innovative digital formats. By supporting young 
writers with disabilities to enter the professional media 
sector and fostering inclusive editorial approaches, 
andererseits provides a compelling example of media 
diversity in action. 
This chapter examines media diversity through the lens of 
the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion 
of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005 Convention) 
through two core indicators of its Monitoring Framework: 
(1) policies and measures that support diversity of 
media, and (2) those that support diversity of content. 
As framed by the Convention, media diversity refers to 
the availability of diverse media content and the presence 
of public, private and community-based media that reflect 
a plurality of cultural expressions and perspectives. It 
encompasses both the diversity of media types and the 
inclusiveness of content that ensures representation 
of different social, cultural and linguistic groups 
(UNESCO, 2008). 
In the current digital era, however, media diversity is not 
merely being supported but actively reconfigured. The 
rise of platform monopolies, the algorithmic curation of 
cultural content, and the decline of independent local 
media outlets have transformed the landscape in which 
cultural expressions circulate. Aligning with the United 
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16 and its 
Target 16.10 on access to information and protection of 
fundamental freedoms (UN, 2015), this chapter attests 
that safeguarding media diversity today requires adaptive, 
multi-stakeholder strategies, particularly in platform 
regulation, Artificial Intelligence (AI) governance and 
institutional capacity building. These strategies are in 
line with the UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of 
Artificial Intelligence (2021), the first global standard-
setting instrument to align algorithmic governance with 
the protection of human rights and cultural sovereignty, 
ensuring that AI systems actively promote diversity in 
cultural production and discoverability of local content. In 
this context, cultural diversity is strengthened by the free 
flow of ideas and nurtured through continuous exchange 
and interaction between countries. 
MEDIA PLURALISM: 
RESPONDING TO SHIFTING TRENDS 
Media pluralism is a key approach to assess media diversity. 
At its broadest, it refers to the presence of a diverse 
range of media outlets and voices. UNESCO has always 
considered media pluralism as a foundational pillar of 
democratic societies. In its 1980 Report Many Voices, One 
World, UNESCO emphasized the need for a balanced flow 
of information and equitable access to communication 
channels to counter media concentration and promote 
democratic dialogue (MacBride, 1981). By the mid-2000s, 
the 2005 Convention positioned media pluralism within the 
broader framework of the diversity of cultural expressions, 
linking it explicitly to freedom of expression, cultural 
participation and democratic governance. Media pluralism 
became associated with not only diversity of ownership 
but also diversity of cultural content and the structural 
conditions necessary for inclusive societies.
In its Media Development Indicators, UNESCO (2008) 
formalized media pluralism as encompassing:
 ¡ plurality of media ownership (public, private, community).
 ¡ diversity of media content reflective of varied social groups.
 ¡ access to media for all sectors of society, especially 
marginalized communities.
More recently, UNESCO expanded this understanding to 
include issues such as algorithmic transparency, platform 
accountability and the risks posed by digital monopolies 
and misinformation (UNESCO, 2022a, 2024a). The evolving 
definition now addresses new challenges in the digital 
era, such as the role of AI in cultural content creation and 
curation, the need for inclusive regulatory frameworks, and 
the importance of ensuring discoverability of diverse cultural 
content online. UNESCO’s evolving conceptualization reflects 
a shift from structural access and ownership to a rights-
based, ecosystem-oriented approach, emphasizing media 
pluralism as a dynamic interplay of institutions, platforms, 
users and policies in safeguarding cultural diversity and 
democratic dialogue.
Keeping pace with these developments, this chapter uses 
media pluralism as an approach to examine media diversity. 
It defines media pluralism as encompassing both content 
choice and diversity across the media landscape, and 
addresses:
a. issues of media concentration, centralization and 
monopolization, which affect ownership and control over 
content production.
b. production, distribution and consumption of cultural 
content across platforms.
47
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
c. accessibility of media sources that serve the diverse 
needs of audiences – especially women, youth, rural 
populations, and linguistic or cultural minorities.
d. the role of user-generated content and digital 
participation within an algorithmically driven 
communication environment.
e. support for vibrant public spheres where multiple 
voices engage in open, inclusive and dialogic exchange 
(UNESCO, 2022a).
MEDIA FREEDOM: INCREASING RISK, 
INCREASING LEGISLATION 
Media freedom refers to the right of the media to operate 
within legal frameworks, independently of government 
control, censorship or interference from state and non-
state actors including commercial pressures. This right 
aligns with the SDG Target 16.10 and is grounded in 
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
which affirms freedom of expression and includes the 
right ‘to seek, receive and impart information and 
ideas through any media’ without regard to national 
boundaries (UN, 1948). Media freedom is essential for 
promoting transparency, accountability and informed 
public discourse, and protects the ability to safely 
criticize government (Whitten-Woodring and Van Belle, 
2014). Furthermore, since media freedom provides an 
environment in which media actors can operate free 
from external interference, including by producing and 
disseminating diverse cultural content without fearing 
censorship and other restrictions, it is also a prerequisite 
for the creation of and access to diverse cultural 
expressions. Therefore, in a context in which a substantial 
share of people’s access to cultural content exists in the 
media environment, media freedom can only reinforce 
achieving the goals of the 2005 Convention.
In 2025, media freedom is undergoing a significant 
global decline. The latest annual report of the 
international non-governmental organization Freedom 
House (2025), which assesses political rights and civil 
liberties across 195 countries and 13 territories, states 
that freedom has declined around the world for the 
19th consecutive year in 2024. People experienced 
deterioration in their political rights and civil liberties 
in 60 countries, and secured improvements in only 
34 countries. Key factors driving the degradation in 
rights and liberties included violence and the repression 
of political opponents during elections, ongoing armed 
conflicts, and the spread of authoritarian practices. This 
decline is also acknowledged in the 2025 World Press 
Freedom Index (RSF, 2025), which observed that over half 
of the 180 countries and territories assessed fall into the 
category of a ‘difficult situation’, a trend largely fuelled 
by economic instability, concentrated media ownership, 
non-transparent public subsidies and the growing 
influence of dominant digital media conglomerates. 
These structural pressures collectively erode editorial 
independence and limit media diversity, with more than 
50% of responding countries reporting interference from 
media owners and nearly one-third observing the closure 
of media outlets. 
Figure 2.1 
Mean Freedom House ‘free and independent media’ score, by developing and developed countries
Source: Freedom House / BOP Consulting (2025)
2.15 2.15 2.12 2.14 2.11 2.08 2.06 2.05 2.02 2.02
1.79 1.81 1.79 1.83 1.81 1.78 1.75 1.74 1.71 1.72
3.12 3.1 3.05 3.02 2.97 2.93 2.93 2.92 2.92 2.92
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Global total Developing countries Developed countries
Freedom House (2025)
48
This downward trajectory is not a recent development. Over 
the past decade, both developed and developing countries 
have persistently registered declining average scores for 
‘free and independent’ media, an indicator assessed across 
multiple dimensions, including editorial independence from 
public or private actors, the extent to which journalists 
are able to fully exercise their profession without being 
subject to pressure or surveillance, and whether works of 
literature, art, music and other forms of cultural expression 
are censored or banned for political purposes. The number 
of countries and territories scoring 0 out of 4 (with zero 
representing the lowest degree of freedom) for the indicator 
on media freedom has nearly tripled, from 13 in 2005 to 
34 in 2024 (Freedom House, 2025; see also Figure 2.1). 
The scale of repression is extensive: according to the 
Freedom House 2025 report, more than 120 countries and 
territories experienced attacks on the media, ranging from 
censorship and artistic suppression to the imprisonment of 
journalists, physical assaults, legal harassment and other 
forms of violence. UNESCO’s 2024 Report on the Safety 
of Journalists (UNESCO, 2024a) notes a 38% increase 
in journalist killings in 2022 and 2023 compared to the 
previous biennium, with 162 deaths recorded in those 
two years (equivalent to one every four days). The report 
emphasizes the urgent need for stronger protections and 
accountability mechanisms to safeguard journalism in 
particular, and media freedom in general, amid rising 
global threats.
In contrast to declining media freedom, there has been a 
significant rise in the adoption of right to information laws, 
with 139 UNESCO Member States having implemented 
right to information regimes as of 2025 (UNESCO, 2025a). 
Right to information laws are legal frameworks that 
give individuals the right to access information held by 
public authorities and are grounded in the principle that 
transparency is essential for accountability, democratic 
participation and good governance. This rise attests to 
UNESCO’s sustained advocacy for media law reform through 
the promotion of normative frameworks that safeguard 
press freedom, media independence and public access 
to information (Mendel, 2021). However, this positive 
legislative momentum is counterbalanced by a concerning 
trend in several countries, where so-called information 
oversight bodies – that is, institutions charged with ensuring 
oversight and accountability for the implementation of 
regulations on access to information, such as information 
commissions, human rights commissions or ombudspersons – 
are being undermined by increasingly authoritarian regimes, 
thereby weakening essential checks and balances (UNESCO, 
2022a). To meaningfully address the erosion of media 
freedom, the expansion of right to information legislation 
must be accompanied by robust regulatory safeguards that 
protect freedom of expression and the right to information, 
while also effectively responding to the challenges 
posed by harmful content, including misinformation and 
disinformation. Key here is to address the present challenges 
posed by the increasing consolidation of media ownership. 
MEDIA OWNERSHIP: 
GROWING CONSOLIDATION, 
ADDRESSING CONCENTRATION
This section reviews the diversity of the current media 
ownership ecosystem, which refers to 1) the number and 
variety of media owners, 2) the structure of ownership 
(public, private, community), and 3) the concentration or 
pluralism in the ownership landscape. It explores how the 
dominance of large technology companies, the decline 
of local media and the growth of influencer-driven media 
have contributed to expanding media access but narrowing 
content choices, leading to a loss in cultural diversity. 
Furthermore, concentrated control and algorithm-driven 
filtering are increasing the risks to transparency in media 
ownership and market diversity. In response, a range of 
regulatory, financial and institutional mechanisms have been 
introduced, including support for the digital transformation 
of public and community media and initiatives to strengthen 
the capacities of media actors in content creation, 
distribution and audience engagement.
Expanding media control, shrinking local media, 
increasing platform power
Media concentration has intensified, with a few large 
companies increasingly dominating national media 
ecosystems (Media Reform Coalition, 2023). In Latin 
America, mainstream outlets remain concentrated among 
powerful conglomerates, while across Africa major 
companies shape television, radio and online landscapes 
(Mukhongo et al., 2024). Such models of conglomerate 
ownership have increased the risks of media homogenization 
that erode the diversity of viewpoints and cultural content, 
exert an outsized influence in shaping public opinion, reflect 
the biases and agendas of media owners, and accelerate the 
decline of local outlets.
Local media is particularly foundational for civic 
engagement, social cohesion and democratic accountability 
(Barclay et al., 2024; Friedland, 2016). It ensures that 
communities can access critical information on quality-of-life 
issues, current affairs and socio-cultural programming that 
is important for their local area, and it provides a platform 
for diverse viewpoints and independent cultural expressions. 
While other platforms and social media are widely used, 
they cannot substitute for the institutional role of traditional 
outlets (Newman et al., 2024). 
49
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
The collapse of local media and other media outlets has 
been ongoing for several decades, driven by shifts in media 
consumption to digital platforms that have disrupted 
traditional revenue models. The COVID-19 pandemic 
accelerated this trend, as many local outlets, like small 
businesses, struggled to maintain their operations. Policy 
responses from Parties to the 2005 Convention address 
these challenges through a diverse set of regulatory, 
financial and institutional mechanisms. Media laws have 
been introduced or reformed to prevent monopolization, 
regulate media ownership and curb excessive concentration. 
The European Media Freedom Act (European Parliament 
and Council of the European Union, 2024), for example, 
sets European Union-wide rules to ensure ownership 
transparency, editorial independence and oversight of 
mergers that may threaten media pluralism. 
Financial and institutional mechanisms have also been 
introduced to diversify media ownership models by 
ensuring the sustainability of diverse media outlets. 
Many Parties now provide direct dedicated funds or 
annual subsidies to target support for local, regional, 
Indigenous and minority-language media. In Guinea, the 
Fonds d’Appui au Développement des Médias (Media 
Development Fund) was created in 2022 to finance 
structural investments that strengthen and professionalize 
public and private media, such as by facilitating access to 
loans for media outlets, supporting the development of 
regulatory frameworks for media sector labour protections 
and providing media training and equipment to local 
media professionals. Cabo Verde provides direct financial 
support for community and private radio stations to help 
alleviate the economic pressures faced by broadcasters 
and improve the conditions for accessing and delivering 
quality journalism. Lithuania’s Media Support Fund, newly 
established in 2023 as part of national reforms, prioritizes 
the development of investigative journalism and minority-
language and cultural media. Importantly, the Fund is 
managed by a depoliticized, self-governing Council that 
was jointly founded by the Ministry of Culture, the Public 
Information Ethics Association and the Association of 
Cultural Periodicals, which determines the Fund’s activities 
and strategic management. New Zealand’s Ministry 
for Culture and Heritage launched the Public Interest 
Journalism Fund in 2020, administered by the independent 
agency New Zealand On Air, to support at-risk journalism. 
From 2020 to 2023, a total of 55 million New Zealand 
dollars in funding supported 73 projects, 219 journalistic 
roles and 22 industry-development initiatives. Thirty-four 
per cent of funding went to historically underserved M āori 
media and Māori-related content, and targeted initiatives 
strengthening court, justice, and other community reporting. 
Funding for key Māori, Pasifika, and local reporting 
programmes has recently been renewed, underscoring their 
demonstrated value (Scoop, 2025; NZ On Air, 2023).  
These mechanisms illustrate how targeted funding serves 
as both a tool to regulate concentration and a means to 
sustain the operations of diverse media outlets, thereby 
contributing to a more diverse media ownership ecosystem. 
Addressing the digital transition
Against the backdrop of media consolidation, the digital 
transformation of the media industry has both broadened 
and restricted media diversity. Where traditional media 
consolidation involves fewer companies controlling legacy 
media, digital media consolidation involves new players 
from the technology sectors acquiring or shaping media 
distribution and production channels. The top five global 
media companies are Netflix, Walt Disney, Comcast, 
Alphabet (Google) and Meta (Facebook) (Zainib, 2023). 
Digital media consolidation is a double-edged sword; 
while increased digital adoption has expanded audience 
reach, it also risks reducing content variety through 
monopolistic practices and platform dominance. Media 
consolidation constrains cultural diversity by narrowing the 
spectrum of content produced and limiting distribution 
channels, privileging commercially profitable material over 
independent or minority voices. This concentration also 
diminishes the diversity of cultural expressions by curtailing 
the visibility of local creators and restricting public access to 
pluralistic cultural content. 
At the same time, while the rise of independent, influencer-
led media has enabled more diverse and decentralized 
cultural content creation, it has also increased the spread 
of misinformation and fragmented public discourse (Bond, 
2022; Dickel and Evolvi, 2022). These trends contribute 
to the formation of echo chambers – environments, often 
on social media, where users are primarily exposed to 
content and opinions that reinforce their existing beliefs or 
preferences – amplified by algorithmic personalization and 
confirmation bias (Modgil et al., 2024; Törnberg, 2018). 
Increasingly, algorithmic recommender systems determine 
what types of content users see and engage with online, 
with significant implications on the discoverability of 
diverse cultural content, an issue that is further explored in 
Chapter 3. Furthermore, while independent media content 
creators can influence public discourse, they can do so 
without adhering to established editorial standards. 
These dynamics undermine the 2005 Convention’s 
commitment to safeguarding the diversity of cultural 
expressions by limiting exposure to varied perspectives 
and restricting equitable access to cultural content. 
They also limit opportunities for many artists and creative 
professionals to make their work known, ultimately 
undermining the sustainability of professional careers 
and business models. 
50
UNESCO’s updated 2025 Guidelines for the Governance of 
Digital Platforms and Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) 
provides an important framework for public authorities and 
media stakeholders in this regard by providing practical 
guidance to safeguard freedom of expression, access to digital 
information and diverse cultural content while mitigating 
the risks of GenAI-facilitated disinformation, hate speech and 
other digital harms (UNESCO, 2025d). 
In addition to the measures addressing media ownership 
identified earlier, developed and developing countries are 
also investing in the digital transition of the media sector as 
part of their strategies to support diverse forms of media that 
serve the public interest, including public service media and 
community media.1 Amid today’s commercial media landscape 
dominated by advertising pressures, misinformation and 
polarizing discourses, it is imperative to sustain and revitalize 
public interest media by supporting its social and civic value. 
To upgrade public service media and community media, 
countries are investing in migrating to digital broadcasting, 
creating online platforms for regional content and providing 
training to media professionals on new technologies and 
digital media. Austria, for example, created the Fund for 
the Promotion of Digital Transformation to strengthen 
media companies and their digital services and promote the 
expansion of digital offerings. Under the European Union-
funded ‘Culture and Creativity for the Western Balkans’ 
1 . Public service media are independent, publicly funded media organizations mandated 
to provide accessible, diverse and high-quality content that serves public interest rather 
than commercial or political agendas. Community media refers to locally oriented, 
non-profit outlets, such as community radio, newspapers, television channels and digital 
platforms, owned and operated by members of a specific community.
project,2 jointly implemented by UNESCO, the British Council 
and the Italian Agency for Development Cooperation, the 
‘Creative Spotlight’ initiative, developed with the Thomson 
Foundation, equips media professionals and content creators 
in Montenegro and other beneficiary countries with training on 
cultural journalism and digital storytelling. The project offers 
online courses, workshops, production grants and mentorship 
opportunities to strengthen their capacity to produce high-
quality cultural content that reaches and engages public 
audiences through innovative digital formats and storytelling 
techniques (Thomson Foundation). Portugal’s media incentives 
scheme has also funded media outlets to modernize their 
operations, including through technological adaptation, the 
development of new content formats and business models, 
and the upskilling of media workers to enhance digital 
competencies. South Africa’s public broadcaster, SABC, led the 
country’s digital transition by moving from analogue to digital 
broadcasting and adopting online streaming, mobile platforms 
and virtual studios for its public media services. 
Community media is also undergoing digital transition. In 
Latin America, for example, several countries have launched 
initiatives. Chile emphasized the role of community media in 
its ‘Recommendations for the Democratization of the Media 
System’ and collaborated with the United Nations to bring 
digital transformation to rural and Indigenous communities 
in regions like Ñuble and La Araucanía, by providing 
high-quality internet access and digital technologies to 
improve economic and social opportunities for vulnerable 
populations (UN, 2025a). 
2. The Culture and Creativity for the Western Balkans project is being implemented in 
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia.
BOX 2.1 •  Public-private media partnerships: building resilience through cultural programming 
The Radio Programme, implemented by the State of Palestine’s Ministry of Culture, is a weekly one-hour broadcast focusing 
on cultural issues, arts, talents, intellectuals and initiatives. Partnering with five private radio stations (24FM, Radio Mawwal, 
Hebron Radio, Shabab FM and Zaman FM), the Ministry expanded its reach across Gaza and Palestine, including marginalized 
areas. Available on social media as well, and featuring interviews with youths, experts and cultural leaders, the programme 
demonstrates how public-private collaboration can strengthen cultural diversity, broaden distribution and build community trust. 
In the current climate of ongoing conflict, however, regular cultural programming has faced frequent disruption, with resources 
redirected towards urgent humanitarian needs (UN, 2025b). This fragility highlights the vulnerability of such initiatives and the 
importance of resilient media partnerships that can adapt and continue to serve communities under crisis conditions. 
The role of radios as sites of creativity and resilience is exemplified by Radio Alhara, an independent online community 
station based in Bethlehem. Its model of digital broadcasting allows the station to bypass the constraints of traditional radio 
airwaves to reach listeners worldwide, notably in 2021 when it sparked a global movement called the ‘Sonic Liberation Front’, 
during which DJs and artists around the world from Colombia to South Africa took turns hosting 24-hour live transmissions, 
contributing to music sets and producing talk shows spanning diverse music genres and themes in solidarity with the 
Palestinian people (Kalia, 2024).
Source: State of Palestine QPR, 2024; UN, 2025b; Kalia, 2024
51
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
Colombia implemented ‘Territories in Dialogue’, a 
programme designed to strengthen community media 
and communication activities developed by local social 
and cultural organizations and groups, including Afro-
descendant communities, with the aim of fostering 
democratic and intercultural processes, citizen 
participation and peaceful coexistence (Foggin, 2020).
Against growing digital media consolidation, these policy 
responses are important strategies for enhancing diverse 
media. Through new laws to curb media concentration 
and increase funding for independent, local and minority-
language outlets, Parties are enhancing the legal, 
structural and technological conditions for producing, 
disseminating and accessing diverse cultural content, 
thereby broadening the spectrum of cultural expressions 
available to the public and reinforcing media pluralism. 
Equally important is the role of education to address 
the digital divide and the imbalance in cultural diversity 
online due to economic, geographical and social 
disparities (UNESCO, 2024b). Media literacy initiatives 
continue to be emphasized in many countries, including 
media education for both media professionals and the 
public, in order to fight disinformation, support digital 
resilience and rebuild trust and demand for quality local 
media. To further ameliorate the information void, a 
wide and widely dispersed media ownership is ever more 
essential to ensure equal participation and influence in 
the democratic process. 
MEDIA MONITORING: 
STRENGTHENING OVERSIGHT
The 2005 Convention identifies media monitoring as a 
core responsibility of regulatory authorities to safeguard 
diversity, independence and accountability. Recent data 
from the Parties’ Quadrennial Periodic Reports show 
an overall rise in the adoption of measures in the field 
of media monitoring, though progress remains uneven 
across the different areas that regulatory authorities are 
responsible for monitoring, from tracking media ownership 
and editorial independence to enforcing cultural and 
linguistic obligations and monitoring digital harms such 
as online harassment and disinformation, as illustrated 
by Figure 2.2.
Most recent data show that a large majority of Parties 
have regulatory authorities tasked with issuing licenses 
to broadcasters, content providers and platforms (85%), 
receiving and addressing public complaints such as 
online harassment, fake news or hate speech (76%), and 
monitoring diversity in media ownership (72%). Two-
thirds of Parties monitor cultural (including linguistic) 
obligations, but the figure remains almost equal to that 
of the previous period. Meanwhile, only 57% of Parties 
monitor editorial independence, and only 50% monitor 
gender equality, these being the weakest areas of media 
monitoring in both reporting periods, with only very small 
increases of 6 and 2 percentage points, respectively, in the 
recent period. In almost all the areas, developing countries 
have higher rates of monitoring than developed ones, the 
sole exception being the monitoring of cultural (including 
linguistic) obligations. 
Figure 2.2 
Proportion of Parties reporting regulatory authorities 
monitoring media, and their responsibilities
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
As in other areas related to human rights and equality, 
civil society organizations play an important role in 
monitoring diversity in the media. One example is the 
Global Media Monitoring Project, an initiative of the 
World Association for Christian Communication and other 
organizations, which analyses, every five years since 1995, 
gender equality in the media. The latest survey from 2025 
indicated that, although there has been a slow but steady 
increase over the last 30 years in the presence of women 
and girls as news subjects and sources (from 17% to 26%), 
women remain a minority in news media. Furthermore, 
progress began flatlining in 2010, as there has only been a 
2 percentage point increase since then (GMMP , 2025).
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
81%
65%
65%
48%
51%
59%
85%
76%
66%
50%
57%
72%
Issuing licenses to broadcasters,
content providers, platforms
Receiving and addressing
public complaints such as
online harassment,
fake news, hate speech, etc.
Monitoring cutural
(including linguistic) obligations
Monitoring gender equality
in the media
Monitoring editorial 
independence of the media
Monitoring diversity
in media ownership
52
At the national level, reforms to licensing frameworks3 
illustrate how states are modernizing monitoring 
mechanisms. Eswatini’s 2023 Broadcasting Act created a 
national authority to formalize licensing and strengthen 
governance, while Cambodia’s 2023 Promotion of Public 
and Private Media policy broadened access through new 
licensing pathways. In Europe, Denmark’s Medieaftale 2023-
2026 reinforced transparent standards for public service 
broadcasting, while Canada’s Indigenous Broadcasting 
Policy in 2023 embedded cultural and linguistic diversity 
into licensing by prioritizing Indigenous broadcasters. 
Monitoring harmful digital content has also become a 
challenging global priority. The European Union’s 2023 
revision of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive 
extended obligations to on-demand and video-sharing 
platforms to implement measures protecting minors from 
harmful content. In Africa, the Central African Republic 
restructured its High Council for Communication in 2024 
to monitor hate speech and manage public complaints.
Further exacerbating this issue of harmful content, is the fact 
that the World Economic Forum has once again identified 
misinformation and disinformation as the top short-term 
global risks in 2025, warning that the proliferation of such 
content continues to deepen political polarization and erode 
public confidence in governance structures (Schiffrin, 2024). 
It is therefore vital to put in place independent mechanisms 
to systematically track and monitor indicators for media 
pluralism and media ownership, as demonstrated in Box 2.2. 
At the global level, UNESCO is leading media monitoring 
efforts through its quadrennial World Trends in Freedom of 
Expression and Media Development Report series. These 
reports provide comprehensive analyses of the state of media 
freedom, pluralism, independence and safety for journalists 
in collaboration with media and research institutions.
Furthermore, there are notable differences in the existence 
of monitoring mechanisms across media types. As 
Figure 2.3 shows, public media monitoring remains nearly 
universal (96%), though slightly declining (from 99% in 
2017-2020). Monitoring of private media has grown to 
86% (up from 73% in 2017-2020), with examples including 
Germany’s expansion of its media diversity monitoring 
mechanism, the Medienvielfaltsmonitor, implemented 
through cooperation among regional media authorities to 
analyse risks of media ownership concentration. In Iceland, 
a committee appointed by the Minister for Education and 
Culture was tasked with monitoring the conditions affecting 
the operations of private media outlets. 
3. Licensing is the process by which authorities grant permission to broadcasters, 
content providers and platforms to operate, often based on compliance with criteria 
to promote pluralism and prevent monopolies. Its purpose is to ensure a diverse 
media landscape by supporting access to a variety of cultural expressions, voices and 
viewpoints in the public sphere.
Its findings and recommendations to support media 
pluralism informed the introduction of grants in 2023 to 
support independent Icelandic media outlets for news, 
culture and current affairs. Online media monitoring, 
once marginal, rose from 54% in 2017-2020 to 76% 
in 2021-2024. A notable example is Canada’s 2023 
Online Streaming Act, which marks a major reform to 
the 1991 Broadcasting Act; the 2023 Act monitors and 
puts in place obligations for broadcasters, including 
digital platforms and streaming services, to ensure 
that their content and programming is representative 
of Canada’s diverse society. These initiatives reflect 
authorities’ increasing awareness of the need to address 
digital media and the risks associated with it from 
the perspective of diversity, as also illustrated by the 
Republic of Korea’s ‘Mediastat’ initiative (Box 2.3). 
Community media monitoring has increased from 
64% in 2017-2020 to 81% in 2021-2024, particularly 
in countries where such outlets are vital for rural, 
Indigenous and multilingual communities.
Box 2.2 •  The Media Pluralism Monitor 
as a model for media monitoring
The Media Pluralism Monitor, developed by the 
Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom at the 
European University Institute, is a research project that 
assesses the health of media ecosystems in Europe by 
identifying threats to media pluralism and transparency 
across the European Union and candidate countries. It 
provides policy makers and civil society with systematic, 
comparative data, making it a strong model for media 
monitoring. 
Since 2016, it has tracked media ownership rules, 
noting that most member states imposed no 
restrictions on foreign ownership (EUI, 2017). By 
2023, its risk score for media ownership transparency 
reached 51% (EUI, 2024).
In 2024, no country was classified as low risk, while 
13 were identified as medium risk and 19 as high 
risk (Bleyer-Simon et al., 2024). This was the first 
time the indicator reached the high-risk band, driven 
by deteriorating media market conditions, digital 
concentration, platform dominance, political and 
commercial interference, and declining safety and 
standards for journalists (Nenadić, 2024; Del Monte 
and Faucheux, 2024).
Source: European Union QPR, 2024; EUI, 2017 , 2024; Bleyer-Simon et al., 2024; 
Nenadićć, 2024; Del Monte and Faucheux, 2024
53
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
Figure 2.3
Proportion of Parties reporting regulatory authorities 
monitoring media, by media type
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
99%
64%
73%
54%
96%
81%
86%
76%
Public
media
Community
media
Private sector
media
Online
media
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Overall, these trends demonstrate that monitoring systems 
are broadening across regions, media types and issues. Yet 
gaps persist, especially in the monitoring of gender equality 
and sustainable support for community media, underscoring 
the need for stronger data collection mechanisms to ensure 
transparency, pluralism and resilience in rapidly evolving 
digital ecosystems. 
EVOLVING MEDIA ACCOUNTABILITY
Parties to the 2005 Convention are navigating tensions 
between regulation, freedom of expression and pluralism 
within a shifting ecosystem of media accountability, which 
assesses the extent to which the media reflects a plurality 
of voices, maintains objectivity, upholds ethical standards 
and adheres to professional norms. Traditional media 
accountability instruments, such as press councils and codes 
of ethics, are facing challenges in adapting to the digital era. 
In response, Parties continue to prioritize the development 
of regulatory mechanisms for media accountability, 
including self-regulatory bodies and professional 
development standards to strengthen the capacity of 
stakeholders to monitor, report and ensure the media’s 
compliance with ethical and professional standards, 
editorial independence and public-interest obligations. For 
example, Slovakia has established new editorial and service 
standards for public broadcasters, mandating compliance 
with service obligations in areas including the diversity 
of content, promoting media literacy and multilingual 
programming for national minorities and ethnic groups.
To strengthen media accountability and reduce inequalities 
in people’s ability to access, create and critically engage 
with media, a multi-stakeholder approach is necessary — one 
that involves collaboration between independent regulatory 
authorities, digital platforms, civil society organizations, 
artists and other relevant institutions (UNESCO, 2023a). 
The Parties’ Quadrennial Periodic Reports reveal varied 
approaches to advancing this objective. 
 ¡ Media and information literacy programmes have explicitly 
promoted critical media engagement and institutional 
transparency. Portugal’s Informal Group on Media Literacy 
is one such example of a multisectoral initiative that 
combines awareness-raising campaigns and educational 
programming to equip citizens with the tools to critically 
assess media content, question information sources and 
hold media institutions accountable.
 ¡ It is essential to ensure that culturally diverse 
media products and expressions are equitably 
created, represented and made discoverable in 
digital environments by enhancing platform access, 
amplifying marginalized voices and investing in public, 
BOX 2.3 •  Broadcasting statistics 
for diversity promotion 
In 2009, the Republic of Korea strengthened its 
Broadcasting Act by introducing Article 35-4, which 
enshrined the protection of diversity of public opinion 
as a guiding principle of broadcasting policy. To 
operationalize this commitment, the government 
launched Mediastat in 2018, a comprehensive statistics 
portal to monitor broadcasting usage, audience 
behaviour and market competition. Operated by the 
Korea Communications Commission (KCC, 2024a), 
Mediastat has become a central tool for policy makers, 
researchers and the public. In 2023, the platform 
underwent a significant upgrade, adding interactive 
dashboards, visualizations and infographics, alongside 
new datasets covering over-the-top* services. In 
addition, Mediastat regularly publishes studies 
conducted by the Korea Communications Commission, 
providing important statistics and data on media 
consumption patterns and public perceptions of 
broadcast media that can inform media policies and 
strategies to support a vibrant and inclusive media 
landscape (KCC, 2024b).
* Over-the-top services are platforms that deliver video, audio or other media 
content directly to viewers via the internet, bypassing traditional cable, 
broadcast or satellite distribution methods.
Source: Republic of Korea QPR, 2022; KCC, 2024a, 2024b 
54
community-based and locally rooted infrastructure 
to support cultural visibility and participation. One 
example is the National System of Radios of Indigenous 
Peoples in Bolivia (Plurinational State of), which has 
expanded community-run radio stations broadcasting 
in Indigenous languages. By providing equipment and 
training in radio production, the initiative enables 
Indigenous communities to both access and create 
media that is socially and culturally relevant. 
 ¡ Support for free and independent media is essential 
to safeguarding civic space and enabling media 
professionals to operate freely in accordance with 
professional and ethical standards. For instance, the 
United Arab Emirates has established associations for 
journalists and media professionals to foster media 
ethics and skills through training, dialogue and peer 
accountability.
 ¡ Digital platforms should be encouraged to increase 
transparency in their content moderation and curation 
policies. In Germany, for example, the revision of the 
Interstate Media Treaty (Medienstaatsvertrag or MStV) 
introduces legal requirements for greater algorithmic and 
media intermediary transparency, including obligations 
to disclose how content is moderated and ranked.
Overall, models of media accountability are quickly changing. 
In 2024 alone, many new models have been enacted. For 
example, Spain enacted the European Media Freedom Act to 
strengthen media accountability by requiring transparency 
regarding ownership and funding, enforcing editorial 
independence, and creating robust safeguards from political 
forces and commercial interests (RSF, 2025). In the same year, 
the government of Indonesia issued a Presidential Regulation 
on the Responsibility of Digital Platform Companies to 
Support Quality Journalism, which includes provisions on 
1) regulation of digital platform companies, 2) collaboration 
with media outlets, 3) the establishment of an independent 
committee by the press council to oversee compliance of 
digital platforms and their obligations, and 4) funding to carry 
out the committee’s duties and functions. 
DIVERSITY OF CONTENT IN THE MEDIA: 
EXPANDING DEMAND AND 
BROADENING CHOICE
As populations change across the world, consumer-citizens 
expect to see media reflect the world around them (Westcott 
et al., 2024). With audiences becoming more diverse and 
anticipating heterogeneous content, their demand for 
diversity is matched by content and programming across 
all forms of media. As the following section demonstrates, 
over the past five years there has been an increase in public 
service media with a cultural mandate, greater diversity in 
programming and audiences, and expanded initiatives to 
support domestic content production and programming.
Public service media with cultural mandate
Between 2021 and 2024, Parties to the 2005 Convention 
reporting public service media with a statutory remit 
to promote a diversity of cultural expressions increased 
(Figure 2.4). The global average rose to 97%, compared 
to 87% in 2017-2020. Developing countries reported a 
13 percentage point increase, while developed countries 
reported a 1 percentage point increase. The global increase 
can be attributed to several driving factors, including efforts 
to improve the representation of marginalized communities, 
strengthen democracy and cultural preservation, and 
respond to demands from community groups and civil 
society organizations. 
BOX 2.4 • Building media resilience in Ukraine
Ukraine’s media reforms to strengthen diversity, 
transparency and accountability highlight the urgent 
need to build resilient, independent and pluralistic 
media amid the overlapping crises of the COVID-19 
pandemic and an ongoing armed conflict affecting 
the country. The Draft Law on Media emerged as a 
landmark initiative, modernizing outdated legislation, 
regulating digital platforms, establishing community 
broadcasting and reinforcing safeguards against 
disinformation. Developed through broad consultations 
with journalists, non-government organizations and 
the Council of Europe, the proposed legislation 
takes a participatory and European Union-aligned 
approach (Council of Europe, 2025). The National 
Public Broadcasting Company has consolidated its 
independence and broadened minority-language 
and cultural programming; for example, through the 
Coordination Center for Broadcasting of National 
Minorities and the documentary series Shades of 
Ukraine. Meanwhile, the National Council of Television 
and Radio Broadcasting has enhanced its oversight, 
reinforcing ownership transparency, tracking gender 
equality in media content and extending its remit 
to include online providers. Complementing these 
structural reforms of the media landscape, the Youth 
MediaLab has promoted media literacy and youth 
engagement, equipping new generations to critically 
navigate complex informational environments during 
crisis and recovery.
Source: Ukraine QPR, 2024; Council of Europe, 2025
55
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
For example, Peru’s National Institute of Radio and 
Television’s initiative on the ‘Visibility and Care of 
Prioritized Populations in National Media’ has produced 
content addressing Indigenous peoples, Afro-Peruvian 
communities and other marginalized groups. Uruguay’s 
‘MVD Socio Audiovisual Accessibility Support’ initiative 
supports audio-visual productions in providing subtitling 
for deaf viewers, audio description for blind people and 
Uruguayan Sign Language in line with the principles of 
universal accessibility established in the international 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
In return, the beneficiary projects are expected to grant 
rights for screening on Montevideo’s public television 
channel and in cultural programmes of the Department 
of Culture, thereby ensuring the broad accessibility of 
national productions. 
Figure 2.4 
Proportion of Parties reporting public service media with a statutory remit to promote a diversity of cultural expressions 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African StatesQPRs 2021-2024
By developing and developed countries By region
QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
94%
84%
87%
95%
99%
97%
70%
83%
90%
88%
94%
94%
87%
91%
97%
93%
100%
100%
96%
97%
At the regional level, the most notable increases were 
in Africa (14 percentage points) and the Arab States 
(21 percentage points) (Figure 2.4). Within Parties in the 
Arab region, there have been collective efforts to preserve 
radio and maintain its role in spreading information and 
promoting culture, in particular, as a bridge between 
generations and cultures. In Algeria, public radio stations 
curate thematic programmes on African dialogue and 
national historical memory, reinforcing cultural identity 
and regional engagement; in Morocco, reforms under Law 
No. 77-03 support the regulation and development of 
audio-visual media, including public radio, in line with the 
principles of editorial independence and the promotion 
of the country’s cultural and linguistic diversity. In Africa, 
radio continues to play a central role in supporting media 
diversity and broadening access to information for diverse 
communities as illustrated in Box 2.5.
56
Content diversity in programming
Regarding content diversity in programming (Figure 2.5), 
which requires localized content produced for multiple 
linguistic and cultural communities, developing countries 
more frequently report mandates for regional or local 
broadcasters (90% compared to 84% in developed 
countries). National broadcasters contribute to diversity 
by supporting the preservation of Indigenous languages 
and cultural traditions. In South Africa, for instance, 
50% of the annual budget is allocated to independently 
produced programmes in previously marginalized local 
African languages, and from regions outside metropolitan 
centres such as Durban, Cape Town and Johannesburg 
(ICASA, 2024).
These measures directly address the cultural 
marginalization of many African languages; by channelling 
substantial resources to independent productions, they 
redress past neglect, support linguistic vitality and expand 
the cultural narratives represented in national media. 
Similar strategies are also evident in the Ethiopian 
Broadcasting Corporation’s programming, which features 
Amharic, Oromo, Tigrinya and Somali content to promote 
and safeguard different local cultural traditions and 
practices of diverse communities. In Mauritania, the national 
public broadcaster launched a dedicated channel for culture 
that provides diverse programming in the country’s principal 
national languages, which include Pulaar, Soninke and 
Wolof. These initiatives highlight the rise of localized cultural 
content programming and public investment in independent 
and regional media production.
Linguistic diversity in media programming is more frequently 
reported in developed countries (89%) than in developing 
countries (83%), reflecting the presence of legal and policy 
frameworks that support institutionalized multiculturalism 
and multilingual broadcasting (ACMA, 2020). 
BOX 2.5 •  Radio as a tool for media diversity 
and social inclusion in Africa
Across the continent of Africa, radio remains a vital 
tool for bridging geographical, informational and social 
divides. In Kenya, new community radio frequencies and 
enhanced opportunities for direct audience feedback 
have boosted youth engagement and intercultural 
dialogue, particularly in rapidly changing, diverse urban 
areas (UNESCO, 2024c). In Madagascar, stations such 
as Studio Sifaka continue to deliver rural-, youth- and 
health-focused broadcasts, often in partnership with 
non-governmental organizations and international 
agencies (Fondation Hirondelle, 2024). Cameroon has 
benefited from UNESCO-led initiatives to build local 
radio capacity and thematic programming, notably 
ahead of key public events (UNESCO, 2025b). South 
Africa’s Strategic Plan (2021-2025) targeted providing 
funding to community radio stations, operated by 
women managers, alongside capacity building and 
support for media projects that are owned or managed 
by women, addressing issues pertinent to women and 
girls (MDDA, 2020). Zimbabwe’s nationwide community 
radio toolkit, launched in 2024, has standardized 
resources and guidance to establish, strengthen and 
sustain healthy community radio stations deeply rooted 
in their communities (ZACRAS and UNESCO, 2024). 
These efforts, supported by regulatory reforms and 
capacity building for independent broadcasters, have 
widened the representation of marginalized voices and 
reinforced the critical role of community-run radio in 
fostering social inclusion. 
Source: UNESCO, 2024c, 2025b; Fondation Hirondelle, 2024; MDDA, 2020; 
ZACRAS and UNESCO, 2024
Figure 2.5 
Proportion of Parties with policies and measures 
that support content diversity in programming, by 
developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
88% 90%
84%85% 83%
89%
74% 77%
70%
87% 87% 86%
Global total Developing countries Developed countries
Regional and/or local broadcasters
Linguistic diversity in media programming
Community programming for marginalized groups
(e.g. Indigenous Peoples, migrants and refugees, etc.)
Socio-cultural programming
(for children, youth, people with disabilities, etc.)
57
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
Several public broadcasters illustrate these approaches. 
The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation operates in 
English and French, while also supporting Indigenous 
languages. The Swiss Broadcasting Corporation provides 
public broadcasting in French, German, Italian and 
Romansh. In Australia, multilingual content is delivered 
through the multicultural television and radio services 
of the Special Broadcasting Service. In countries such 
as Australia and Canada, immigration and multicultural 
policies have contributed to structured mechanisms that 
facilitate access to multilingual media. International 
streaming services with multilingual media are also readily 
available in these countries. In addition, international 
streaming services offering multilingual content are widely 
available, further expanding linguistic choice within 
national media environments.
As shown in Figure 2.5, however, community programming 
specifically for marginalized groups – such as Indigenous 
Peoples, migrants, refugees – remains less widespread. 
Relevant measures are reported by 70% of developed 
countries and 77% of developing countries. This suggests 
that, despite broader multilingual media availability, 
targeted support for under-represented creators and 
communities is uneven. 
Existing examples demonstrate that strengthening such 
support can play an important role in fostering greater 
diversity in media content (Box 2.6).
Support for socio-cultural programming aimed at children, 
youth and persons with disabilities is significantly higher, 
reaching 87% in developing and 86% in developed 
countries. Chile’s CNTV Infantil cultural and educational 
television, for example, focuses on high-quality children’s 
programming on free-to-air television with the aim of 
fostering development, learning and cultural awareness 
among its young audiences. These trends distinguish 
two distinct rationales for promoting content diversity 
in programming. 
For marginalized groups, diversity recognition is rooted 
in justice (addressing cultural bias and discrimination), 
while for broader socio-cultural groups, diversity is aimed 
at inclusion (addressing access bias and exclusion) 
(Kymlicka, 2010). At the same time, recent research 
has shown that, at least in some countries, private 
broadcasters are now less inclined to invest in the 
production of children’s programmes than in the past. 
This decline is being driven, at least partly, by changing 
viewing habits, as more children are turning to streaming 
services such as Netflix or YouTube (Burke, 2025), 
something which could have significant implications on 
the types and quality of educational or cultural content 
that children access.BOX 2.6 •  Strengthening Indigenous voices 
through audio-visual storytelling 
Argentina’s ‘ORIGEN’ initiative illustrates how targeted 
policies can expand content diversity by supporting 
under-represented creators. Led by the National 
Institute of Indigenous Affairs and funded in 2023 
by the UNESCO International Fund for Cultural 
Diversity, the programme trained young filmmakers 
from five Indigenous communities (Mbyá Guaraní, 
Wichí, Kolla, Huarpe and Qom) in cinematographic 
skills and independent production (UNESCO, 2023b). 
It fostered peer exchange across Indigenous groups 
and established a national Indigenous film network to 
promote visibility (Mukhongo et al., 2024). By enabling 
Indigenous communities to tell their own stories, 
ORIGEN directly addresses gaps in representation 
within national media systems. It demonstrates how 
investment in culturally specific training and distribution 
nurtures local talent as well as broadens the diversity of 
cultural expressions available to audiences. Its success 
has also led to the development of a similar programme, 
the pan-African Film Residency for Young Women 
Filmmakers (for details, see UNESCO, 2025c). 
Source: Argentina QPR, 2024; UNESCO, 2023b, 2025c; Mukhongo et al., 2024
BOX 2.7 •  Commitment to diversity of voices 
and experiences 
The Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) has 
made immigrants a central focus of its programming, 
guided by the motto ‘human is the essence’. TRT 
features immigrant-related content across channels 
such as TRT News, TRT Children and TRT Documentary, 
aiming to foster understanding and support the 
integration of immigrants into society (TRT, 2025). 
With about one million migrant children receiving 
education in the country (as of 2022), TRT Children 
has initiated plans to produce a cartoon episode to 
introduce educational services for these children (ECRE, 
2025). Such programming is designed to promote social 
harmony and reflect TRT’s commitment to representing 
diverse voices and experiences within Türkiye. 
Source: Türkiye QPR, 2021; TRT, 2025; ECRE, 2025
58
fostering gender parity and building talent capability for 
current and future female media professionals. 
Domestic content incentives
Globally, reporting of domestic content regulations for 
audio-visual media rose from 68% in 2017-2020 to 80% in 
2021-2024 (Figure 2.6). This trend is reflected in evolving 
legislative and regulatory frameworks across regions. 
In Europe, for example, the Audiovisual Media Services 
Directive (European Parliament and Council of the European 
Union, 2018) has recommended that at least 30% of 
content provided by video-on-demand services (excluding 
news, sports and games) consist of European works. 
In other regions, notably Latin America and the Caribbean 
(where 70% of Parties report having domestic content 
regulations), regulatory frameworks have been slower to adapt 
to the rapid growth and transnational character of over-the-
top platforms; as a result, such services remain less subject to 
domestic, regional or language quotas than linear television. 
According to desk research conducted for this report, only 
24% of Parties have quotas for subscription video-on-demand 
services, compared to 47% for free-to-air television. 
There is also a growing commitment to advancing gender 
inclusion within media institutions and content frameworks. 
Bulgaria’s National Television and Radio networks have 
adopted policies for balanced gender representation in 
media content and implemented editorial guidelines that 
ensure diversity in programming across age, gender and 
socio-cultural groups. Ireland has established ‘ An Coimisiún’, 
a new media regulator with an explicit mandate to promote 
gender equality in media output and leadership. Austria 
reported on ‘Vorlaut Kollektiv’, a feminist collective providing 
a platform for young online journalists to explore gender 
and socio-political issues through independent reporting 
using digital media formats popular among younger 
audiences, such as TikTok stories or Instagram reels. Qatar-
based institutions, including the Al Jazeera Media Institute 
and the Qatari Media Centre, have organized training 
initiatives to empower women in journalism and media 
production (Qatar News Agency, 2024). Bangladesh and 
Uganda have also hosted UNESCO-supported workshops 
focusing on gender-responsive reporting and addressing 
gender disparities in the media as well as on guidelines 
for gender equality, disability representation and inclusive 
news coverage. These initiatives, at the levels of production, 
representation, programming and leadership, are gradually 
Figure 2.6 
Proportion of Parties reporting domestic content regulations for audio-visual media 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African StatesQPRs 2021-2024
By developing and developed countries By region
QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
71%
67%
68%
79%
82%
80%
45%
70%
70%
76%
71%
69%
68%
100%
82%
79%
70%
80%
83%
80%
59
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
Figure 2.7
Proportion of Parties with domestic, regional or linguistic content quotas for subscription video on demand and 
for free-to-air television, by developing and developed countries
Source: BOP Consulting (2025)
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
Video on demand
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
Free-to-air television
5%
24%
33%
47%
62% 76%
Box 2.8 •  Colombia’s ‘smart regulation’ and 
the audio-visual boom
Colombia illustrates how Latin American states are 
using flexible regulation to attract investment while 
stimulating local production. Law 1556 introduced 
incentives including a 40% cash rebate on audio-visual 
services and a 35% transferable tax credit, drawing 
major platforms such as Netflix and Amazon to produce 
series like Narcos and Distrito Salvaje. These measures 
have generated over US$499 million in investment 
and thousands of jobs, boosting skills and positioning 
Colombia within the region’s ‘audio-visual boom’ (CFC, 
2023). Yet this model reflects broader risks: reliance 
on global platforms can marginalize independent 
producers, concentrate ownership and homogenize 
content. While Colombia’s policies showcase the 
benefits of ‘smart regulation’ for capacity building and 
global integration (Enriquez and Melguizo, 2021), 
they also highlight the challenge of balancing foreign 
investment with safeguards that protect cultural 
sovereignty and diverse local expressions. 
Source: CFC, 2023; Enriquez and Melguizo, 2021 
It is important to note that the percentage of Parties that 
have established domestic, regional or linguistic content 
quotas varies widely between developed and developing 
countries, across all categories examined: free-to-air 
television (76% and 33%, respectively), pay television 
(68% and 20%), subscription video on demand (62% and 
5%) and radio (36% and 24%) (Figure 2.7). 
For subscription video on demand, 62% of developed 
countries, compared to 5% of developing countries, have 
domestic, regional or linguistic content quotas in place. 
The low prevalence of subscription video-on-demand quota 
legislation in developing countries reflects several factors, 
including a continued regulatory focus on traditional 
media such as free-to-air and public broadcasting rather 
than streaming services, as well as limited institutional 
capacity to regulate global platforms that operate outside 
national jurisdictions and are therefore not bound by 
local content quotas. With a global average of 24%, both 
developing and developed countries face challenges in 
strengthening legal frameworks that impose discoverability 
requirements or content quotas on subscription video-on-
demand platforms. These challenges include considerations 
related to technical capacity (drafting and enforcing 
digital media regulation), political will (prioritizing cultural 
and linguistic diversity on digital platforms) and policy 
coordination (addressing international pressures while 
advancing local content objectives). 
60
CONCLUSION
Building on the trajectories traced by UNESCO’s 
Re|Shaping reports – from the 2015 to the 2022 edition 
– it is clear that media diversity must be positioned as a 
critical policy priority. Where earlier editions identified 
specific risks, this report highlights that governments 
and institutions are responding with stronger regulatory 
frameworks, expanded monitoring systems, and statutory 
cultural mandates for public service and community 
media. These efforts are particularly important in crisis 
and conflict contexts, where media serves as vital 
infrastructure for social cohesion and resilience. Overall, 
this evolution reflects a shift from risk identification 
towards strengthening resilience through regulation, 
platform accountability and investment in inclusive 
content systems. 
At the same time, challenges identified earlier remain 
all-pervasive and will continue to require action to support 
the diversity of media outlets and content, enabled by 
increased media freedom, accountability and monitoring 
mechanisms.
Parties to the 2005 Convention have reported meaningful 
progress: over 80% have introduced domestic content 
regulations for audio-visual media; nearly all report public 
service media with a statutory cultural mandate; and 
there has been a significant rise in media monitoring 
frameworks, particularly in the Global South. Measures 
to support community media, regional content and 
multilingual programming have also expanded, alongside 
increasing investment in digital transition and media 
literacy initiatives. However, these advancements are 
occurring in a context of intensifying challenges, such 
as platform consolidation and algorithmic opacity.
Against this backdrop, governments must reinforce the 
policy foundations of the 2005 Convention by aligning 
national measures with global frameworks such as the 
UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence (2021), which provides an overarching 
normative framework for aligning AI governance with 
the protection of human rights and cultural sovereignty. 
Doing so will require renewed commitment to regulatory 
innovation, platform accountability and the promotion 
of cultural and linguistic diversity in digital governance. 
This includes strengthening independent media 
institutions, ensuring transparent oversight of AI and 
content moderation systems, and expanding equitable 
access to public interest media. Ultimately, safeguarding 
media diversity today is essentially about building 
inclusive, pluralistic and resilient societies that not only 
enable full and meaningful participation in democratic 
life but also will protect and promote the diversity of 
cultural expressions.
61
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity 
To support the diversity of the media
 ¡ Regulate media concentration and platform 
dominance: Governments, regional regulatory 
authorities and competition bodies should adopt 
and enforce media ownership laws to ensure fair 
competition and prevent monopolies and excessive 
consolidation. This involves overseeing media 
mergers and implementing financial and institutional 
tools to diversify media ownership and ensure the 
sustainability of diverse media outlets. 
 ¡ Enhance media ownership transparency: National 
regulatory authorities, parliaments and watchdog 
bodies should require public disclosure of media 
ownership structures and funding sources to ensure 
democratic accountability, safeguard editorial 
independence and enable citizens to evaluate the 
sources of the information and cultural content 
they consume. 
 ¡ Invest in community and public service media:  
National governments, cultural ministries and 
development donors should provide stable financial 
and institutional support for public service and 
community media. Support should expand access, 
promote cultural diversity and ensure inclusive 
participation of rural, Indigenous and vulnerable 
communities.
 ¡ Expand and harmonize media monitoring systems:  
National media regulators and relevant international 
organizations should 1) strengthen the legal mandates 
and resources of media monitoring bodies to track 
pluralism, ownership, independence and gender 
equality across traditional and digital media; and 
2) facilitate regional and international cooperation 
through shared data and good practices, such as the 
Media Pluralism Monitor or UNESCO’s quadrennial 
World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media 
Development report series.
 ¡ Strengthen context-appropriate media accountability 
mechanisms: Develop regulatory frameworks that 
strengthen media accountability mechanisms and 
ethical standards. Build the capacity of relevant actors 
to monitor compliance, protect editorial independence 
and public-interest obligations, promote content 
diversity, and address mis- and disinformation and 
other digital harms. 
 ¡ Ensure algorithmic transparency and 
AI accountability: Governments, platform operators 
and international digital governance bodies should 
1) require platforms to disclose their content 
moderation and curation algorithms, and to conduct 
risk assessments of AI systems that influence public 
discourse; and 2) encourage co-regulatory approaches 
involving civil society and academia, in line with 
UNESCO’s updated Guidelines for the Governance 
of Digital Platforms and Generative Artificial 
Intelligence.
 ¡ Strengthen collaboration with civil society:  
Empower civil society organizations to advocate for 
media pluralism, monitor ownership concentration 
and promote media literacy, strengthening public 
resilience against mis- and disinformation.
To support the diversity of cultural content 
in the media
 ¡ Implement domestic cultural content quotas and 
discoverability requirements: National governments 
and audio-visual regulatory agencies should adopt and 
enforce content quotas, incentives and discoverability 
requirements for national, regional and linguistic 
content, especially on streaming and subscription 
platforms, to preserve cultural sovereignty and support 
local cultural and creative industries. 
 ¡ Ensure diversity in cultural media content 
and production: Governments should address 
representation gaps within national and local media 
systems, by adopting policies that promote media 
production and content with diversity across age, 
gender and socio-cultural groups.
 ¡ Promote inclusive and localized programming:  
Public broadcasters, community media networks and 
cultural councils should develop editorial guidelines 
and funding schemes, which support programming 
that reflects linguistic and cultural diversity, gender 
equality and under-represented voices. Efforts should 
also prioritize independent productions from non-
urban regions and minority communities. 
 ¡ Strengthen capacity for independent content 
creation: Development agencies, international donors 
and national training institutes should fund initiatives 
that train content creators from Indigenous, youth and 
minority communities in media production and digital 
storytelling, and promote their visibility. 
 ¡ Strengthen data collection on cultural content 
diversity: National statistics agencies and regulatory 
bodies should build technical capacity to collect and 
disaggregate data on cultural media content diversity, 
including by region, language, gender and age, to 
inform evidence-based policy adjustments and meet the 
2005 Convention’s monitoring requirements.
RECOMMENDATIONS
© Marcelrose. Artwork by Emo de Medeiros/Wikimedia Commons
63
Chapter 3
The digital environment: 
online culture, 
offline implications 
Heritiana Ranaivoson
© Marcelrose. Artwork by Emo de Medeiros/Wikimedia Commons
64
 ¡ Revenues from digital services now represent the main 
source of income for creators, up from 17% in 2018 
to 35% in 2023. At the same time, digitization has 
intensified income instability and exposure to Intellectual 
Property infringements for many artists. Policy responses 
aimed at ensuring fair remuneration in the digital 
environment remain limited. 
 ¡ Inequalities persist in access to digital technologies, 
infrastructures and skills. Digital literacy gaps are 
particularly pronounced: 45% of the population in 
developed countries possesses intermediate digital skills, 
compared to only 16% in developing countries. Similarly, 
67% of individuals in developed countries have basic 
information and communications technologies skills, 
versus 28% in developing contexts. Gender disparities 
also persist, with women receiving lower pay and 
occupying fewer senior positions in many professions 
across the digital cultural sector. 
 ¡ Gaps in data regarding access to and consumption of 
digital media cultural content remain a global challenge. 
Only 48% of Parties report measures to develop statistics 
or studies in this area. Data collection is constrained 
by methodological difficulties, the reluctance of major 
streaming platforms to share user data, and the limited 
transparency in AI systems, all of which affect the online 
discoverability and visibility of creative works. 
 ¡ The rapid rise of AI, particularly GenAI, is reshaping 
various cultural and creative sectors. Creative 
professionals report overwhelmingly negative 
perceptions of its impact, with 79% viewing AI as a 
threat to art workers. Economic projections forecast 
substantial risks for creators, estimating global revenue 
losses of 24% for music creators (around 4 billion euros 
per year by 2028) and 21% for audio-visual creators 
(approximately 4.5 billion euros annually). Additional 
concerns include the technology’s capacity to replace 
human work, the unlicensed use of copyrighted data 
to train GenAI systems, and potential losses in cultural 
and linguistic diversity. 
 ¡ Despite growing policy attention to AI, its implications 
for the cultural and creative sectors remain insufficiently 
addressed. Between 2016 and 2023, 148 AI-related 
bills were adopted across 128 countries, yet only one 
identified culture as its primary subject matter. 
 ¡ Digital transformation in public institutions is a 
prerequisite for the broader digital transition of 
the cultural and creative sector. Public institutions’ 
growing adoption of digital cultural strategies 
responds to both evolving sector and stakeholder 
needs and the transformative effects of digitization 
on the creative value chain. 
 ¡ Digital cultural governance has become a central 
pillar of cultural policy making. Between 2021 and 
2024, 85% of Parties developed policies to promote 
the digital transformation of the cultural and creative 
sector, up from 80% in 2017-2020. Progress is also 
evident in Parties’ efforts to support vibrant domestic 
digital cultural and creative markets (64%) and to 
enhance the discoverability of domestic cultural 
content (80%), representing a 20 percentage point 
increase in both areas since the last reporting period. 
However, in 2025, the Conference of Parties to the 
2005 Convention noted that existing regulatory 
frameworks are inadequate to address challenges 
posed by Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI).
 ¡ The global digital marketplace is characterized by 
a small number of major platforms that dominate 
the digital ecosystem; this raises concerns about 
market imbalance and its implications for creativity 
and diversity. In this environment, a limited group of 
highly visible artists captures a disproportionate share 
of revenues and exposure, while many lesser-known 
creators struggle to achieve comparable visibility. 
 ¡ Access to digital cultural content is increasingly provided 
through private services such as music and video-
streaming platforms, whose non-transparent content-
curation practices are often driven by commercial 
priorities. These platforms tend to prioritize mainstream 
content, limiting the discoverability of less-known works 
and increasing the risk of cultural homogenization.
 ¡ Against this backdrop, Parties are adopting targeted 
measures to support local creatives in the digital 
environment and promote the diversity of cultural 
expressions. Parties are implementing practical 
initiatives such as trade fairs, financial mechanisms, 
incubators for creative startups, and obligations 
requiring global streaming platforms to invest in 
the production of local audio-visual content. 
KEY FINDINGS
65
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
85% of countries support digital 
transformation of the cultural sector 
through:
 ¡ Digitizing public services and functions
 ¡ Interministerial collaboration
 ¡ National digital cultural strategies and plans
 ¡ Targeted sector-specific support (e.g. gaming)
Countries support local digital creative 
sectors through:
 ¡ Trade shows and networking events
 ¡ Incubators and financing mechanisms 
for entrepreneurship
 ¡ Investments in local content production
 ¡ Digital skills development
Digital divides persist
 ¡ Only 16% of people in developing 
countries have intermediate ICT skills
 ¡ Women creators are concentrated 
in lower-income brackets 
 ¡ A small number of platforms dominate with 
non-transparent content curation practices, 
limiting discoverability 
 ¡ Only 48% of countries are developing 
statistics on consumption of 
digital media cultural content 
Digital priorities shaping countries’ 
cultural policy
 ¡ 64% support vibrant domestic 
cultural markets
 ¡ 80% enhance discoverability of 
domestic cultural content
 ¡ 85% support digital skills development 
as 35% of creators’ revenues come from 
digital services
Digitization has increased 
precarity for creators
 ¡ Unstable employment
 ¡ Intellectual Property infringement
 ¡ Challenges for fair remuneration
Opportunities and challenges 
presented by AI
 ¡ A powerful tool to enhance creative 
production, experimentation and access
 ¡ But poses threats to cultural and linguistic 
diversity and creators’ rights and livelihoods
 ¡ Preliminary projections for global revenue 
loss by 2028: 24% for music creators and 
21% for audio-visual creators
Culture remains a blind spot 
in AI governance
 ¡ Only 1 in 148 AI bills focuses on culture
 ¡ Legal disputes over copyright and 
transparency
Rapid adoption 
of AI 
technologies
Unequal access 
to digital 
technologies
Global 
concentration 
among online 
platforms
New forms of 
remuneration and 
skills requirements 
for creators
Digital 
transformation 
of cultural and 
creative sectors
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
66
INTRODUCTION
Twenty years ago, at the time of the drafting of the 
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005 Convention), 
online distribution platforms were in their infancy, with 
most operating in niche domains such as book retail or 
music streaming, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) was far 
from being as pervasive as today. While the Convention 
itself predated some of the major transformations 
brought about by the digital revolution, reflections on 
this issue gained momentum in the years that followed, 
leading to the adoption of the Operational Guidelines 
on the Implementation of the Convention in the Digital 
Environment in 2017. The Guidelines acknowledged the 
impact of technological change on the cultural and creative 
sectors and started a new process aimed at addressing 
the challenges raised by digitalization while leveraging 
its potential for creative innovation and for democratizing 
access to the creation and enjoyment of diverse art forms. 
Today, the Convention continues to remain technologically 
neutral as the principles and rights it enshrines apply 
regardless of the technologies involved. Nevertheless, in 
light of the rapid and significant disruptions to the creative 
sectors brought on by digital technologies, the Conference 
of Parties to the 2005 Convention expressed, during its 
meeting in June 2025, their concern that existing legal 
and normative instruments are insufficient to address these 
pressing challenges, hence the need to strengthen or to 
complement them.
The core question that this chapter seeks to address is: What 
cultural policies are needed to promote and protect the 
diversity of cultural expressions in the digital environment?
This chapter focuses therefore on the cultural policy 
responses pursued by Parties and the role the Convention 
has played – and will continue to play – in order to guide 
Parties, cultural sectors and professionals in these sectors to 
benefit largely from digital technologies. Fulfilling this role 
requires analysing current trends in the adoption of digital 
technologies, and the potential impact of such adoption on 
the diversity of cultural expressions.
THE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION OF 
THE CULTURAL AND CREATIVE SECTOR
Digital technologies have transformed cultural creation, 
production (including financing), distribution and 
consumption, opening up significant opportunities in 
cultural sectors. Creators now have broader access to 
technologies that enable the production of high-quality 
content at a fraction of the previous cost, and online 
platforms have expanded their visibility, reach and 
monetization opportunities, giving creators access to 
valuable data and analytics on audience engagement and 
preferences (CISAC and PMP Strategy, 2024). Furthermore, 
the COVID-19 crisis accelerated the adoption of digital 
technologies by both creators and organizations on the one 
side and consumers on the other, and the pace of change 
only continued to intensify in the years that followed, with 
the emergence of technologies such as Generative Artificial 
Intelligence (GenAI) ushering in new modes of creation and 
access as well as concurrent challenges and opportunities. 
Policy responses to digital transformation 
The increasing adoption of digital technologies and its 
pervasive influence across the cultural and creative sectors 
have prompted a cultural policy response at both national 
and international levels by Parties to the 2005 Convention. 
The digital transformation is reshaping not only cultural 
production but also the governance of culture itself. Public 
bodies and institutions responsible for cultural policy 
have expanded their mandates to encompass areas of 
digital policy such as supporting digital innovation and 
entrepreneurship, developing digital skills and literacy, and 
investing in digital cultural infrastructure. 
Digital cultural governance has thus become an important 
dimension of cultural policy making. At the global level, 
the share of Parties revising or developing regulatory 
frameworks, sectoral strategies and national plans to adapt 
the cultural sectors in the digital environment has increased 
from an already high baseline of 80% in 2017-2020 to 85% 
in 2021-2024 (Figure 3.1). This growth is driven in part by 
significant increases in certain regions, particularly among 
the African, Asian and Pacific, and Arab States regions. 
 ¡ Digital public services
Several Parties have digitized the operations of public 
cultural institutions to improve service delivery and raise 
awareness among the creative community of existing 
cultural policies and support schemes. In Oman, the 
Ministry of Culture, Sports and Youth developed a 
Smart Portal as one of the key initiatives of a broader 
Government Digital Transformation Program (2021-2025). 
67
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
The Smart Portal centralizes access to information and 
services, enabling artists and cultural organizations to 
stay informed about the latest cultural policies, events 
and opportunities, while also facilitating administrative 
procedures such as registering cultural events or licensing 
literary or artistic works. Similar initiatives have been reported 
in Czechia, Morocco and Slovenia, where digital platforms 
are being developed or updated to digitize administrative 
procedures, enabling artists and cultural professionals to 
apply for funding grants or access social security services, tax 
reductions and other public support mechanisms. 
Several countries have also implemented digital 
management systems enabling the systematic collection of 
data for the monitoring and evaluation of public cultural 
institutions and informing decision making. In Uganda, for 
example, 150 district officials have been trained to operate 
the Culture Management Information System, which is 
designed to be interoperable with other e-government 
systems to support real-time data collection and reporting on 
artists, cultural institutions and organizations. 
 ¡ Interministerial collaboration
The effective design and implementation of digital cultural 
policies is often hampered by a lack of collaboration 
between ministries of culture and other relevant ministries, 
such as those responsible for digital affairs. Of the 
3,908 reported measures in the Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports, only 214 were designed through interministerial 
collaboration; among these, 5.1% were designed in 
collaboration with ministries of communications and 
3.1% were designed with ministries of innovation. 
Such coordination requires sustained mechanisms for 
joint planning, data sharing and capacity building 
across ministries. This helps ensure that cultural policy 
perspectives not only inform digital policy but also actively 
shape inclusive and context-sensitive digital transitions.
For example, in Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire, dedicated 
ministerial departments for digital transition are responsible 
for implementing the government’s digital policies across 
various policy areas, including the cultural sector. Policy 
actions implemented through interministerial collaboration 
include the development of both digital infrastructure to 
expand connectivity across the country, and education and 
training programmes to strengthen the digital competencies 
of youth, artists and cultural professionals, as well as digital 
governance measures, particularly regulatory frameworks to 
protect Intellectual Property and encourage ethical use of 
digital technologies. 
 ¡ National digital strategies
Several Parties have adopted comprehensive national 
strategies and plans to guide the digital transformation of 
their cultural and creative sector. These frameworks serve 
as a practical road map, outlining national priorities and 
expected outcomes, allocating resources, and engaging key 
stakeholders responsible for their implementation. China’s 
Action Plan for the Innovative Development of Metaverse 
Industry (2023-2025) is led by the Ministry of Industry and 
Information Technology in coordination with the Ministry 
of Culture and Tourism, and focuses on encouraging 
innovation and the use of immersive technologies, in fields 
such as gaming, animation and installations in cultural 
sites or commercial spaces. Australia’s national Digital 
Culture Strategy (2021-2024) takes a diagnostic approach 
by assessing the digital readiness of the creative sectors 
and developing tailored capacity-building programmes 
based on the gaps identified to develop the skills and 
capacities of artists and organizations. Australia’s strategy 
also includes a digital First Nations strategy to safeguard 
and promote Indigenous cultural Intellectual Property, 
an issue that has gained increased importance in light of 
GenAI technologies and their implications for copyright 
and cultural ownership. 
Figure 3.1
Proportion of Parties with policies, measures or 
mechanisms supporting the digital transformation of 
cultural and creative industries and institutions, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
82%
68%
60%
75%
94%
100%
80%
100%
80%
93%
67%
90%
92%
85%
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
68
 ¡ Targeted sectoral strategies
Considering the diversity of creative ecosystems and 
the different dynamics at play that shape how they are 
impacted by digital technologies and processes, several 
Parties have implemented targeted strategies that address 
specific cultural sectors. Among them, the gaming sector 
has emerged as a growing policy priority in countries such 
as Chile, France, Germany, Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, 
Spain, Türkiye and Viet Nam, which have implemented a 
range of targeted measures supporting its development: 
from dedicated funding schemes and training programmes 
in collaboration with film and university institutions to 
trade fairs connecting game developers with investors 
and gaming hubs equipped with advanced technical 
infrastructure. 
Figure 3.2
Proportion of the population accessing types of digital 
content, by developing and developed countries
Source: GWI (2022) / BOP Consulting (2025)
21% 22% 20%
37% 39%
35%
82%
89%
78%
92%
95%
90%
Global Total Developing countries Developed countries
Listening to podcasts Playing video games
Streaming music Streaming TV content
Data from GWI (formerly GlobalWebIndex) highlights the 
widespread popularity of video games as a form of digital 
cultural consumption. In both developed and developing 
countries, the largest share of internet users accesses 
digital content through streaming television content 
(92%), closely followed by playing video games (82%), 
while music streaming accounts for only 37% (Figure 3.2). 
The video game sector has emerged as a new frontier for 
on-screen diversity, as evidenced by the numerous policy 
measures that emphasize the strategic role of games 
development in showcasing national cultures, languages, 
folklore and visual aesthetics. 
Other sector-specific strategies include those implemented 
by Sweden and the Republic of Korea for the performing 
arts sector. Although the sector was among the hardest 
hit by revenue loss due to venue closures during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the crisis also created opportunities 
to innovate new monetization models and strategies 
for audience outreach. Measures included investing in 
recording equipment and streaming infrastructure to 
support high quality digital broadcasting and providing 
free access to recorded performances for underserved 
communities, while exploring new remuneration models 
for digital distribution. 
As evidenced in the discussions above, the digital 
transformation encompasses a complex interplay between 
technologies, processes, and the artists and cultural 
institutions shaping cultural production. To respond 
effectively to these changes, digital cultural strategies 
should consider the specific ways in which digitization 
is reshaping the creative value chain, and identify 
the evolving needs of the sector and its stakeholders, 
including shifts in remuneration models and how 
audiences are engaging with digital culture. 
At the international level, recognizing the urgent 
and growing demands from Parties for clearer policy 
guidance in order to keep pace with a rapidly evolving 
digital environment, the Conference of Parties to the 
2005 Convention convened an expert reflection group, 
which formulated a series of recommendations to support 
effective policy responses in the digital environment 
(Box 3.1). Complementing this work, the Operational 
Guidelines on the Implementation of the Convention in 
the Digital Environment are being updated to provide 
a revised framework to address emerging challenges, 
including those arising from GenAI.
69
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
BOX 3.1 •  The Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital environment 
Over the years, the 2005 Convention has served as an important multilateral forum where culture and digital 
technologies have been addressed as an explicit and sustained focus of international cooperation and policy dialogue. 
In this context, at its ninth session in June 2023, the Conference of Parties to the 2005 Convention requested the 
Secretariat to create a Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital environment composed 
of leading experts in the field, which would engage in an in-depth reflection on four themes identified by the Parties, 
namely, the promotion of linguistic diversity of cultural content, the discoverability of national and local cultural content 
on digital platforms, the importance of greater and meaningful transparency on digital platforms regarding cultural 
issues, and the impact of AI on cultural and creative sectors.
The work carried out by the Reflection Group culminated in the formulation of 1 1 recommendations, which are organized 
within four areas of action, plus one additional area addressed specifically to UNESCO: 
 ¡ Normative action
1 . Adopt an Additional Protocol to the Convention in the digital environment
 ¡ Exchange of information and good practices 
2. Optimize the collection and sharing of information
3. Revise the framework for Quadrennial Periodic Reports
 ¡ Awareness raising and advocacy 
4. Create a consultation and dialogue framework
5. Support advocacy actions
6.  Raise public awareness on cultural responsible practices and behaviours 
in the digital environment through cultural education initiatives
 ¡ Capacity building 
7. Creation of national digital culture capacity plans
8. Update arts education curricula and methodologies
9. Support the creation of new UNESCO Chairs in digital culture
10. Creation of a global network of experts in digital culture and AI
 ¡ Final recommendation addressed to UNESCO
1 1 . Reinforce UNESCO’s action on AI and Culture 
Recommendations 2 to 1 1 were adopted by the Conference of Parties at its 10th session in June 2025 and are currently 
being implemented. The first recommendation, which calls for the adoption of an Additional Protocol, was proposed 
by the Reflection Group in response to the urgent need to strengthen the normative architecture for protecting and 
promoting the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital environment, through a legal instrument with the same 
binding force as the Convention. While discussions on its adoption are ongoing, the Convention’s governing bodies have 
expressed concern that the rapid development of GenAI technologies is fast outpacing the establishment of international 
norms and the regulatory safeguards needed to uphold the value of human creativity, the rights of creators, and cultural 
and linguistic diversity. 
Source: UNESCO, 2025 
70
THE CONCENTRATION AMONG 
ONLINE PLATFORMS: 
IMPACT ON CULTURAL DIVERSITY
As highlighted in the 2018 edition of the Re|Shaping 
Policies for Creativity report, linear cultural value chains 
where creation, production, distribution and consumption 
once followed a sequential model have been transformed 
by the digital environment into dynamic ecosystems. In this 
networked model, the boundaries between these stages are 
increasingly blurred: creators, distributors and audiences 
interact in real time, often through platforms whose core 
business lies outside the cultural and creative sector. 
For example, in the music sector, artists can compose, 
produce and distribute their work independently on online 
streaming platforms, while audiences influence trends and 
visibility by engaging with content through clicks, views 
and shares. In the film sector, streaming platforms not 
only distribute but finance and produce original content, 
reshaping traditional roles in the film value chain. 
A small number of major online platforms now dominate 
global markets for cultural and creative content. For 
example, Netflix continues to lead the video-on-demand 
market in Europe and in the Americas, Kinopoisk in 
Central Asia and Showmax in Africa. This concentration is 
reinforced by cross-side network effects, which is when the 
value of a platform increases with the number of users on 
both sides of the market (Ranaivoson, 2019). For instance, 
the more viewers on YouTube, the more creators are 
attracted and vice versa. This self-reinforcing cycle makes 
it difficult for new or smaller platforms to compete. Once 
a platform has reached a certain scale, it benefits from a 
‘winner-takes-all’ advantage, where successful platforms 
continue to grow exponentially and crowd out other 
competitors. As such, the concentration of power in a few 
dominant platforms raises concerns about monopolistic 
practices and the potential undermining of creativity and 
diversity (Gardiner, 2024). 
These dynamics also affect artists and creators. In a 
highly competitive digital landscape where vast amounts 
of content are being uploaded daily, a small number of 
popular artists capture an outsized share of revenues 
and visibility, leaving the majority of lesser-known artists 
on the margins. Policies are therefore needed to support 
local ecosystems of artists and organizations in creating 
and producing creative works and to promote the 
discoverability of such works.
Supporting local ecosystems of artists, 
intermediaries and organizations
The proportion of Parties with policies and measures ensuring 
vibrant domestic digital cultural and creative industries 
markets with a diversity of actors of all sizes, has increased 
from 44% (2017-2020) to 64% (2021-2024), with almost 
the same proportion in developing and developed countries. 
Noticeable increases can be observed in regions such as the 
Arab States (from 55% to 91%) and the Asia and Pacific 
region (from 30% to 86%), underscoring the importance of 
digital creative and cultural industries in these regions as 
emerging cultural powerhouses (Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3
Proportion of Parties with policies and measures ensuring 
vibrant domestic digital cultural and creative industries 
markets with a diversity of actors of all sizes, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Parties have reported diverse measures to support local 
creative ecosystems, notably by strengthening the capacities 
of creators, producers and intermediaries to participate in 
the digital creative economy through initiatives ranging from 
trade fairs and fiscal measures to digital incubators and 
capacity-building initiatives.
55%
55%
30%
29%
47%
44%
44%
91%
62%
86%
38%
58%
68%
64%
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
71
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
 ¡ Trade shows and networking events
Several Parties have implemented initiatives that promote 
networking and visibility, to support independent creators 
and small cultural enterprises in gaining access to markets 
and investment opportunities. In Morocco, the Ministry 
of Youth, Culture and Communication organized the first 
Moroccan Gaming Expo in 2024 to promote the country’s 
gaming industry and to position Rabat Gaming City as a hub 
for local and international companies. The event enabled 
young Moroccan game developers to present their projects 
to an international audience, paving the way for potential 
collaborations with investors and industry professionals. 
Furthermore, the event included a varied programme of pitch 
talks, networking sessions and showcases, covering diverse 
themes ranging from the integration of Moroccan heritage 
and culture to game development and the role of national 
banks in Morocco’s gaming ecosystem. 
 ¡  Incubators and financing mechanisms 
for creative startups
Artists and creative enterprises often face barriers to 
accessing finance as they are frequently perceived as 
high risk by conventional lenders and may be unaware 
of opportunities for public financing or lack the skills and 
resources to produce investment-ready business plans (OECD, 
2022). Parties, however, reported a range of financing 
mechanisms such as direct grants, fiscal incentives, tax 
credits or incubators to support products to reach markets. 
In France, the National Centre for Cinema and the Moving 
Image provides grants to support the creation of works 
across various digital fields, including digital arts and 
cultural content, virtual reality, and video games. It has 
a dedicated Digital Creators Fund (‘CNC Talent’), which 
supports the creation of content that is distributed free 
of charge on platforms such as Facebook, YouTube and 
Instagram. The Fund has supported over 600 creators 
producing diverse works ranging from youth fiction series 
and art history documentaries to podcasts and animated 
series. New Zealand has implemented video game tax credits 
which work as fiscal incentives that allow game production 
companies to deduct expenses from their taxes. 
 ¡ Fostering digital innovation and entrepreneurship
In Malawi, the Malawi Communications Regulatory 
Authority (MACRA) took active steps to strengthen the 
digital creative ecosystem through its ‘Local Digital Content 
Development Initiative’, which awarded grants to five local 
digital content creators working across diverse creative 
sectors, including music recording and digital artistic and 
video production. The initiative aims to empower Malawi 
storytellers, innovators and artists to produce high-quality 
digital content and foster sustainable opportunities in the 
digital economy (Tech Review Africa, 2025). In parallel, 
MACRA has introduced the draft Digital Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship Bill (2024), which is expected to establish 
a framework to promote entrepreneurship and digital 
innovation, creating a more favourable environment and 
attracting Malawian talent and capital. 
 ¡ Investments in local content production
An area receiving growing attention from policy makers is 
regulations requiring global streaming platforms such as 
Netflix, Disney+ and Amazon Prime Video to invest in the 
production of local audio-visual content. Proponents of these 
regulations argue that as global streaming platforms profit 
from national markets and often operate outside of local 
tax regimes, they should contribute to the development of 
domestic audio-visual ecosystems to ensure that local stories 
and voices are also represented on-screen. In the European 
Union, following the 2018 revision of the Audiovisual 
Media Services Directive, several countries have introduced 
investment obligations for non-domestic video-on-demand 
service providers. The regulatory pressure appears to be 
showing results. In 2022, platforms such as Netflix and 
Amazon Prime reached or surpassed the required 30% local 
content quotas in key markets in Europe such as Belgium, 
France, Germany and Italy, boosting commissions for local 
productions and fostering collaboration with national 
broadcasters (Keslassy, 2022). Such investment obligations 
have demonstrated considerable potential to support 
independent European audio-visual productions, thereby 
contributing to the promotion of cultural diversity (Kostovska 
et al., 2023). 
Similar discussions are underway in several countries 
including Australia, Canada, Mexico and South Africa. 
However, such efforts have faced strong opposition 
from global streaming platforms, which argue that such 
regulations constitute discriminatory practices and are 
therefore in violation of bilateral free trade agreements. The 
picture is further complicated when considering the varying 
degrees of consensus within each national context for the 
regulation of streaming platforms, as well as disagreements 
between media stakeholders, political actors, creators and 
artists over whether platforms should be regulated in the 
first place and, if so, for what purposes and through which 
mechanisms (Vlassis, 2023). 
The discoverability of diverse expressions online
As cultural content is increasingly shared and accessed 
through online platforms (such as search engines, 
app stores, streaming platforms and social media), 
discoverability has emerged as an important concept for 
understanding how the digital environment affects the 
visibility of diverse linguistic and cultural expressions online. 
72
Discoverability refers to the likelihood that an item will 
be encountered and engaged with by someone who was 
not previously aware of its existence nor actively seeking 
it (Salganik et al., 2024). A necessary but insufficient 
condition for discoverability is availability: if a work is not 
available, or if no information is available about this work 
and its creators, there is no room for discoverability. 
Discoverability gained prominence as an area of policy 
concern in the francophone context, leading to the 
establishment in 2019 of the joint France-Quebec Mission on 
Online Discoverability of French-Language Cultural Content, 
which addresses the challenges francophone content faces 
in standing out amid the vast volume of English-language 
content. These concerns have only intensified over the years 
and have since become a global concern, as many countries 
recognize that local artists and cultures are struggling to 
gain visibility online. This shift is reflected in the significant 
increase across all regions in the share of Parties reporting 
policies to enhance access to and discoverability of domestic 
culture, an increase from 60% in 2017-2020 to 80% 
in 2021-2024 (Figure 3.4). 
Figure 3.4
Proportion of Parties with policies and measures 
enhancing access and discoverability of domestic 
cultural content in the digital environment, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
64%
50%
50%
56%
65%
75%
60%
91%
69%
93%
71%
89%
82%
80%
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
Discoverability is closely related to issues around the 
production and capture of data. Regarding capture, data are 
tightly controlled by platform providers, who harvest them 
to gain pervasive insight into their users – their interactions, 
contexts and preferences – and act on them through their 
interfaces and algorithmic systems. The ensuing lack of 
transparency prevents all other ecosystem stakeholders 
(including policy makers, consumers, public service 
broadcasting commissioners and creators) from making 
informed production, consumption or policy choices. 
The lack of transparency can also result from the technical 
challenges in setting up and applying standards regarding 
metadata. In the musical field, when works or sound 
recordings are poorly indexed, it hampers the ability of 
collectives to pay rights holders their due royalties and 
reduces the discoverability of musical content. Notable 
initiatives addressing this challenge include MétaMusique 
(Box 3.2) and the Pan-African Digital Licensing Hub. The 
Hub includes 17 collective management societies across 
Africa that license digital music services. These societies 
retrieve musical works by authors and artists, which were 
previously released on digital services without proper 
registration and were appearing in large databases of 
unidentified musical works.
BOX 3.2 • MétaMusique
In Quebec, Canada, the ‘MétaMusique’ initiative was 
founded in 2020 by a consortium of professional 
associations, collecting societies and unions in the 
music sector. It provides a guide designed to help 
rights holders in the music value chain index their 
content using metadata. It aims to establish a common 
metadata model for all music content, offering detailed 
instructions on how to use and apply it effectively, 
highlighting metadata fields that are mandatory, 
recommended or specific to certain stakeholders. This 
initiative contributes to strengthening the Quebec music 
industry by promoting standardized indexing practices.
The initiative has attracted more than 42,000 visits 
to its webpage to date. Beyond the educational 
component, a second component still under 
development is a tool for capturing and distributing 
musical metadata, which will further facilitate the 
referencing process and thus promote the influence of 
Quebec musical artists in the international ecosystem. 
Its application in other countries and regions is under 
study, for example in the European Union. 
Source: Canada QPR, 2024
73
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
Furthermore, the dominance of large multinational 
streaming platforms has raised concerns regarding 
the discoverability of diverse cultural content, as non-
transparent algorithmic recommender systems driven by 
commercial interests tend to promote English-language 
hits, blockbusters and bestsellers that appeal to a wider 
global audience as opposed to lesser-known national 
or local cultural content. In response, countries have 
taken concrete measures to address the risks of cultural 
homogenization and have partnered with a range of 
stakeholders, including global streaming platforms, to 
invest in developing local talent and supporting their 
visibility online. 
In the case of the music sector, a 2023 study examining 
the impact of music streaming on the types of songs 
and artists popular with consumers in several European 
countries found that among those surveyed, the top 10 
streamed songs were predominately by domestic artists 
and composed in native languages (Page and Dalla 
Riva, 2023). The authors of the study described this as 
a phenomenon of ‘glocalization’, observing that local 
artists and music dominate domestic charts even as 
global streaming platforms offer access to a vast array 
of international catalogues. Data from the Global Music 
Report 2025 published by the International Federation of 
the Phonographic Industry also point to growing cultural 
and linguistic diversity in global music streaming. The 
world’s top 10 markets now include Brazil, China, Mexico 
and the Republic of Korea, while emerging markets in 
the Arab States, Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa 
recorded the highest growth in revenues from recorded 
music (IFPI, 2025). 
According to the Global Music Report 2025, the 
impressive growth of emerging music markets is driven 
by sustained investment in local talent and support for 
artistic development. In a landscape of digital abundance 
where anyone with access can create and upload their 
music online, intermediaries such as record music labels 
play an important role in discovering, nurturing and 
promoting artists. For instance, global record music 
labels are investing in local talent through their regional 
subsidiaries and partnerships. In Madagascar, a strategic 
partnership was signed in 2023 between Universal Music 
Africa and Renala Music, the music branch of Manoova, 
a Madagascar-based organization. Through Virgin Music 
Africa, Universal’s label for digital distribution, the 
partnership aims to valorize the rich musical heritage of 
Madagascar by digitizing and enabling the streaming of 
its catalogue locally and internationally. 
Likewise in the audio-visual sector, global streaming 
platforms such as Netflix are adopting ‘localization’ 
strategies to expand in foreign markets by investing in 
the production of original local content and licensing of 
legacy film or television catalogues to attract domestic 
viewers (Ramachandran, 2025). In 2022, the Kenyan 
Ministry of ICT, Innovation, and Youth Affairs signed a 
two-year memorandum of understanding with Netflix 
to promote the growth of Kenya’s film industry. The 
agreement outlined areas of partnership such as content 
investment, capacity building and training of local talent 
and collaboration with public institutions such as the 
Kenya Film Commission, Kenya Revenue Authority and 
the National Treasury to ensure the development of an 
enabling environment for the production of films (Kitili, 
2022). These initiatives represent a comprehensive 
approach to strengthening the film value chain, 
from talent development to production and access, 
demonstrating how strategic public-private partnerships 
can enhance the visibility of locally produced content. 
At the same time, some of these approaches have raised 
concerns about the risk of privileging standardized 
content, misrepresenting local realities and generating 
dependency on foreign investment (Alcorn, 2024; 
Thuillas and Wiart, 2023). 
In many countries, local and regional video-on-demand 
services or national broadcasters and public service 
media offer streamed content on their own platforms, 
some of which may have existed before the arrival 
of global streaming platforms. In India, the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting has encouraged 
over-the-top (OTT) platforms to produce and promote 
regional content since 2018, contributing to a greater 
availability of diverse cultural influences and content 
in regional dialects as well as providing a platform for 
regional creators to reach a wider audience. A study 
conducted in 2025 found that although there is growing 
competition for Hindi and English content streamed on 
international streaming platforms, regional OTT platforms 
offering content in Hindi, Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam 
remain extremely popular in India (Das and Rousseau, 
2025). A strong preference for domestic content can 
also be observed in countries such as South Africa, where 
national platforms such as DStv, Showmax and SABC 
Plus (a government-owned platform) dominate. Many 
of these platforms offer free or free-with-ads options 
and have a competitive advantage over international 
platforms as they tend to have lower subscription fees 
(Fabric, 2025). 
74
BOX 3.3 • Kibanda Xpress: Uganda’s video-on-
demand platform dedicated to local films
In 2019, Ugandan filmmakers and producers 
approached MTN Uganda, a telecommunications 
company, highlighting the absence of a centralized 
digital platform for distributing local films in the 
country. In response, MTN partnered with Pearlwood, 
a consortium representing key stakeholders across 
Uganda’s film sector to create Kibanda Xpress, a video-
on-demand platform that was launched in 2021 . The 
platform is hosted on the YOTVChannels mobile app, 
enabling users to stream Ugandan films, new releases 
and other local entertainment content. Payments can 
be made through mobile money applications, providing 
a locally adapted digital payment system. The initiative 
aims to reduce copyright infringement and increase 
the visibility of Ugandan films and artists. In addition, 
MTN covers promotion and marketing costs for film 
productions, which traditionally account for a significant 
proportion of distribution budgets, thereby helping to 
strengthen the commercial viability of local films (PC 
Tech, 2021). 
While at the time of writing this chapter, Kibanda 
Xpress no longer appears to be supported by MTN, 
Pearlwood launched a new regional streaming platform 
in 2025, called Stream East, dedicated to showcasing 
the works of East African filmmakers. The platform was 
developed as part of the ‘Revitalizing the Film Industry 
for Livelihood Enhancement’ project supported by 
the UNESCO International Fund for Cultural Diversity 
(Muwado, 2025). 
Source: Uganda QPR, 2023; PC Tech, 2021; Muwado, 2025
WORKING CONDITIONS AND SKILLS OF 
ARTISTS AND CULTURAL PROFESSIONALS
Digitalization and working conditions
Rights remuneration data from the International 
Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers 
(CISAC) attempts to quantify the impact of digitalization 
on creators’ revenues (Figure 3.5). At the global level, the 
share of digital in the source of revenues kept on increasing 
from 17% in 2018 to 35% in 2022. From 2022 forward, 
digital represented the largest source of revenue for creators 
in sectors that include music, audio-visual, visual arts, 
literature and drama.1
Figure 3.5
Global share of creators’ income, by income stream 
(2018-2023)
Source: CISAC (2019, 2020, 2021 , 2022, 2023, 2024) / BOP Consulting (2025)
1 . ‘Digital’ corresponds to collections from licensing digital services as well as the use of 
creative works on digital recordable devices such as photographic images on USB keys. 
17% 21%
26%
33% 35% 35%
39%
37%
40%
38% 33% 30%
29% 28%
17%
17% 22% 25%
4% 4% 6%
4% 3% 3%7% 6% 7% 4% 3% 3%
5% 4% 5% 5% 4% 4%
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Digital Live and background
TV and radio Private copying
CD and video
Other
Another strategy that countries are adopting to expand 
access to local content is the digitization of books, music and 
film archives, along with the development of online platforms 
that make these cultural resources publicly available. For 
example, in Latvia the National Library developed a digital 
library compiling 3.8 million digitized books, objects, 
films and other cultural materials from over 500 cultural 
institutions, while Cuba launched the virtual library Patria 
Libros, expanding online access to the country’s documentary 
heritage. Brazil digitized the services of the public library 
network in the State of Rio de Janeiro during the COVID-19 
pandemic to enable all citizens to access e-books, audiobooks 
and videos. In Slovenia, the Slovenian Film Database serves 
as a national platform providing information on Slovenia’s 
film heritage, which recently expanded its offerings to 
include on-demand viewing of films. 
75
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
It is therefore clear that digitization has impacted the 
working conditions of creators and cultural professionals. 
While digital tools and platforms offer an enticing 
promise of creative autonomy, flexible work practices 
and unlimited access to audiences, the reality faced by 
many creators has been marked by even higher job and 
income precarity (De Voldere et al., 2024), infringement 
of Intellectual Property (Bonadio et al., 2022), the rise of 
new gatekeepers in the form of large online technology 
platforms, and algorithmic bias that amplifies the visibility 
of artists that already have a significant following 
(Ranaivoson et al., 2024). 
In the longer term, the International Labour Organization 
notes a rise in precariousness among cultural workers, 
which takes notably the form of temporary and part-
time employment, wage inequalities and gaps in social 
protection. Regarding the rights and working conditions 
of artists and cultural professionals in the digital 
environment, the UNESCO Recommendation concerning 
the Status of the Artist (1980 Recommendation) 
especially calls for fair remuneration for creators online, 
the strengthening of artists’ digital literacy skills and 
competencies, and increased access to the equipment 
and infrastructures required to produce, disseminate and 
access creative works online (UNESCO, 2022).
Despite persistent challenges in ensuring fair 
remuneration for artists in the digital environment, policy 
responses have been limited. Nonetheless, some countries 
have implemented noteworthy initiatives. For example, 
the Guiding Principles on Diversity of Content Online, 
initially developed by Canada and endorsed by Australia, 
France, Finland and Germany, include provisions for 
fair remuneration and economic sustainability for 
content creators.
Effective policies for skills development
Digitization has had a considerable impact on the 
prerequisite skills needed to participate in the digital 
creative economy since it has introduced new modes 
of creation and production as well as business and 
monetization models. For example, artists may need to 
learn how to use new software for content creation and 
editing; professionals require training to learn how digital 
tools can be leveraged to increase the visibility of their 
work on social media and streaming services; and cultural 
institutions increasingly rely on digital tools to manage core 
operations such as online ticketing and data analytics to 
better understand and engage audiences, which is crucial 
for informed business decisions. 
Recommendation 8 of the UNESCO Reflection Group 
on the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital 
environment (Box 3.1), which calls for the updating 
of arts education curricula and methodologies, 
acknowledges the importance of equipping learners and 
cultural professionals with the skills to critically engage 
with digital technologies, including AI. There has been 
a notable increase in the proportion of Parties reporting 
measures aimed at equipping artists and cultural 
professionals with the competencies, knowledge and 
skills needed to work with new technologies. As shown 
in Figure 3.6, the share of Parties promoting digital 
creativity and competency for artists and other cultural 
professionals has increased from 71% in 2017-2020 to 
85% in 2021-2024. However, a gap remains between 
developing countries, where the proportion has increased 
from 67% to 81%, and developed countries, where it has 
increased from 77% to 93%.
Figure 3.6
Proportion of Parties with measures and initiatives 
promoting digital creativity and competencies of artists 
and other cultural professionals working with new 
technologies, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Countries have reported a wide range of measures to 
develop digital skills and literacy among their populations. 
In countries such as Cabo Verde, Oman, Paraguay, Qatar 
and South Africa, national initiatives have focused 
on establishing training centres and hubs providing 
educational courses in technical fields, such as coding 
and data science, to create a highly skilled workforce 
and facilitate entry into specialized professions in 
programming and advanced technologies. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
77%
67%
71%
93%
81%
85%
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
76
A number of countries are encouraging innovation 
and experimentation in the arts by providing access 
to specialized facilities, laboratories and mentorship 
opportunities. For example, Slovenia has established an 
extensive network of six artistic research laboratories in 
partnership with higher education institutions. These 
laboratories serve as hubs for digital experimentation 
in virtual and augmented reality, robotics, immersive 
media and interdisciplinary artistic research. Such 
initiatives provide important creative learning spaces to 
help artists and youth critically engage with emerging 
technologies and develop new art forms. 
Furthermore, several Parties have introduced targeted 
initiatives to strengthen digital skills within specific 
creative sectors. Screen Ireland’s National Talent Academy 
network includes five academies across the country for film, 
television, animation and crew. In many countries where 
training institutions tend to be concentrated in capital 
cities, such a regional model ensures that opportunities for 
skills development are accessible nationwide. 
In the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, the Digital Culture Network connects cultural 
institutions with a network of ‘Tech Champions’ who 
provide free consultancy services in areas such as data 
analytics, website creation, digital marketing and strategy. 
The initiative supports cultural organizations in digitizing 
their operations, strengthening managerial capacities 
and investing in the digital infrastructure and resources 
needed to adapt to new forms of audience engagement 
and creative practices (Digital Culture Network, 2025). 
Investing in digital skills development is therefore essential 
to ensure that creators and cultural organizations can 
fully harness the creative opportunities offered by new 
technologies and build sustainable career pathways. 
At the international level, UNESCO has advocated 
for increased international cooperation in ensuring 
a sustainable and inclusive digital transition in the 
cultural and creative sector. Since 2022, it has been 
implementing a ‘Digital Technical Assistance’ programme, 
with funding from Belgium, Canada and France. The 
four pilot countries, Cameroon, Georgia, Uganda and 
Zimbabwe, have benefited from this programme in areas 
such as training artists in the audio-visual sector, as well 
as conducting impact studies on the digital music sector 
and national mappings of the digital creative sectors. 
The programme underscores the commitment of the 
international community to invest in knowledge sharing 
and capacity building to support the participation of 
countries in the digital creative economy. 
DIGITAL DIVIDES
Digital divides and inequalities in access to digital 
technologies persist between countries and regions in 
the world. Limited internet access, notably driven by 
infrastructural inequalities and the high costs of access 
relative to purchasing power, creates barriers for some 
populations in accessing (and producing) diverse cultural 
content. These inequalities are further compounded by 
significant gaps in digital literacy. According to data from 
the International Telecommunication Union, 67% of the 
population in developed countries have basic information 
and communication technology skills, compared to 28% 
in developing countries, while 46% of people in developed 
countries have intermediate skills, compared to 16% in 
developing countries (Figure 3.7). When it comes to AI 
capabilities, the gap is even more pronounced between 
countries such as the United States of America (United 
States) and other developed countries on the one side, 
and countries in the Global South on the other, due to 
entrenched inequalities in access to capital, infrastructure 
and the research and development capacities needed to 
build AI ecosystems (Kulesz, 2024).
BOX 3.4 • Strengthening digital competencies 
of artists in the Republic of Moldova
As part of the ‘Digital Creativity Lab’ project, supported 
by the UNESCO-Republic of Korea Funds-In-Trust for the 
Development of Creative Industries, a mapping exercise 
was conducted to assess the digital competencies of 
artists and cultural professionals in the Republic of 
Moldova and identify recommendations to support 
the digital transformation of the creative sector. The 
assessment revealed that 75% of small and medium-
sized enterprises surveyed do not have their own website 
and the most urgently needed digital skills identified 
by respondents include the use of GenAI technologies, 
digital content creation and business development for 
creative startups. 
The study also highlighted key challenges Moldovan 
higher education institutions face regarding the 
integration of digital creative skills within education 
curricula and the promotion of digital innovation and 
research. The findings from this mapping exercise led 
to the development of new courses, such as in graphic 
design, new media and animation, at the Academy of 
Music, Theatre and Fine Arts, and will continue to guide 
capacity-building initiatives aimed at strengthening 
the digital competencies of both teachers and students 
while equipping education institutions with the 
necessary digital tools and technologies. 
Source: UNESCO, 2023
77
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
Figure 3.7
Mean share of the population with basic, intermediate 
or advanced information and communication 
technology skills, by developing and developed 
countries (2020-2023)
Source: ITU (2023) / BOP Consulting (2025)
Furthermore, the lack of available statistics or studies 
on access to digital media remains a global challenge, 
with only 48% of Parties reporting measures in this 
area, representing a marginal increase from 35% in 
the previous reporting cycle (Figure 3.8). Several factors 
may explain this: 1) platforms’ reluctance to share data 
on audience engagement and creator demographics, 2) 
the lack of transparency in algorithmic systems, which 
can introduce biases in the visibility and promotion of 
certain types of content and 3) general lack of data on 
how people access and engage with cultural content 
online, or on how artists and creators use digital tools 
and platforms, given the wide range of privately owned 
services (for sectors such as gaming, music and video 
streaming), many of which operate globally and are 
not required to share user data. This is an area where 
governments should work closely with the private sector 
and academic or research institutions. Indeed, much of 
the available information on digital creation and access 
is derived from user surveys conducted by major global 
platforms, underscoring the importance of strengthening 
cross-sector collaboration and establishing clearer 
obligations for data sharing, both of which are critical 
for informed cultural policy making in the digital age. 
9%
4%
6%
46%
16%
39%
67%
28%
53%
Basic Intermediate Advanced
Developed
countries
Global mean
Developing
countries
Figure 3.8
Proportion of Parties that have statistics or studies 
on access to digital media, by developing and 
developed countries 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Within countries, divides persist in digital access and 
use, often depending on age, gender, income and 
other factors. These disparities include differences in 
digital literacy and, more generally, users’ capabilities. 
Of particular importance is the gender divide. While 
innovation can improve gender equality, the United 
Nations Pact for the Future raises concerns about the 
growing digital divide between genders. In the cultural 
and creative sector, women are well represented among 
digital content creators, yet significant gaps persist in 
income levels, representation in certain creative sectors 
and access to management positions. A user survey of 
content creators conducted by the marketing platform 
ConvertKit (rebranded as Kit in 2024) shows that women 
are more represented in low-income categories (earning 
less than US$25,000 per year), but under-represented in 
high-income categories (earning more than US$150,000 
per year) (ConvertKit, 2022). The issue of horizontal and 
vertical segregation within creative professions and the 
challenges to gender equality in the digital environment 
are addressed further in Chapter 9. 
Several countries have developed policies aiming at 
reducing digital divides among their populations, including 
vulnerable groups such as people with disabilities. Launched 
in March 2023, the Mercosur Audiovisual Platform, which 
includes Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, aims to 
expand access possibilities for all audiences, in particular 
for people with visual or hearing impairments. In Qatar, the 
Mada Assistive Technology Centre is dedicated to supporting 
persons with disabilities to fully participate in cultural life 
and access quality education. 
43%
31%
35%
66%
39%
48%
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
78
In 2022, the Centre signed a memorandum of 
understanding with the Ministry of Culture to collaborate on 
joint projects, including a training programme for ministry 
employees to raise awareness of digital accessibility and 
integrate assistive technologies in cultural programming. For 
instance, during the Doha International Book Fair in 2024, 
the Centre organized interactive theatre activities for 
children with disabilities (Mada, 2024).
There are also policies that take a community-based 
approach aiming to expand digital infrastructure to rural 
areas and opportunities to engage with new digital art 
practices. In Timor-Leste, the ‘Naroman ba Suku’ programme, 
led by the State Secretary for Social Communication, equips 
villages with information and communication technologies 
to promote public access to information especially in rural 
areas. Notably, participating villages (31 in 2024) were able 
to showcase their cultural events and their local cultural 
assets through social media platforms such as Facebook 
and YouTube to promote cultural tourism and attract visitors 
to the villages. In Indonesia, the Media Arts Community 
Festival stands out as an innovative initiative seeking to 
bring media art to under-represented regions. Organized 
by the Indonesian government in collaboration with local 
communities, each edition of the Festival is hosted in a 
city that does not have an established media arts scene. 
The Festival encourages local artists to engage with artist 
collectives from other regions and participate in workshops, 
experimenting with new technologies to create multimedia 
artworks, among other activities (Ok Jeon et al., 2024).
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Specific challenges and opportunities related to AI
Arguably, the most significant shift in the digital 
environment for cultural and creative sectors has been 
the rapid adoption of AI technologies, especially GenAI, 
across the creative ecosystem. While early applications 
to the cultural field such as algorithmic recommender 
systems shaped dissemination of and access to cultural 
content, GenAI has radically transformed the creation and 
production of culture itself. Powered by large language 
models trained on vast datasets to learn complex patterns, 
these systems are able to generate text, images, audio and 
other forms of content (Kulesz, 2024).
Before examining the challenges and risks, it is worth 
recalling the opportunities AI and GenAI bring to the 
cultural and creative sector, which partly explains their 
rapid adoption. Respondents to the survey on the 
implementation of the MONDIACULT 2022 Declaration 
conducted in 2024 and addressed to governments, 
civil society organizations and artists, identified several 
opportunities. AI can help creators in their creation 
process, either by generating an initial idea on which 
the creator can work, or by improving the work of art 
or parts of it. It can also facilitate the dissemination of 
cultural expressions, for example through personalized 
recommender systems. 
BOX 3.5 • TACIR: Empowering vulnerable youth in Tunisia’s digital creative economy
Launched in 2023, the ‘TACIR’ programme (Talents-Arts-Creativity-Inclusion-Research), led by the Multimedia and Audiovisual 
Association, aims to foster the social and professional inclusion of vulnerable youth aged 22 to 35, particularly young women 
in low-income regions of western Tunisia by supporting their participation in the digital creative sectors. The programme is 
structured around several key components and is adapted to the context-specific needs and resources of low-income regions 
through partnerships with local associations and universities. Its main activities include:
 ¡ TACIR-Training: Establishing digital cultural hubs that offer training and mentorship programmes in fields such as 
digital arts, gaming and immersive media as well as in cultural project creation, management and promotion.
 ¡ TACIR-Innov: Supporting creative entrepreneurship through pre-incubation and incubation programmes.
 ¡ TACIR-Diffusion: Creating community cultural spaces to expand access to cultural infrastructure and resources.
 ¡ TACIR-Research: Conducting research to deepen understanding of creation, innovation and development processes 
in the cultural and creative industries. 
During the first year of its pilot phase, the TACIR programme engaged over 900 young participants, established seven 
regional partnerships with local cultural associations and set up three fully equipped and operational TACIR’LABs. In 2024, 
the programme was a beneficiary of the UNESCO International Fund for Cultural Diversity. By democratizing access to culture 
and developing the creative and entrepreneurial skills of young people, the TACIR programme aims to generate employment 
opportunities in the digital creative industries and support a more inclusive cultural ecosystem. 
Source: Tunisia QPR, 2024
79
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
While such AI technologies have emerged as powerful tools 
to enhance human creativity, they also pose significant 
risks as growing concerns point to GenAI’s potential to 
automate certain creative tasks performed by artists 
such as writers, illustrators, literary translators, voice-over 
actors and photographers, thereby leading to job losses 
and the devaluation of creativity. When asked about the 
impact of AI on their livelihoods, the creative professionals 
responding to the MONDIACULT survey expressed 
overwhelmingly negative views, with 79% considering AI a 
threat to art workers. A study on the economic impact of AI 
in music and audio-visual industries carried out by CISAC 
estimates that the market penetration by GenAI outputs 
could put 24% of music creators’ and 21% of audio-visual 
creators’ revenues at risk in 2028, for an annual loss 
reaching respectively 4 billion euros and 4.5 billion euros 
by 2028 (CISAC and PMP Strategy, 2024).
The inundation of AI-generated ‘synthetic’ content on the 
internet also threatens the diversity and quality of creative 
works and their ability to convey the identities, values 
and meaning unique to human creativity. Such content 
generated entirely from AI prompts with limited human 
input, is characterized by being of low to medium quality 
and imitates existing styles from the copyrighted works 
on which its AI systems are trained. As training datasets 
become increasingly saturated with synthetic AI-generated 
content instead of human-created content, there is a risk 
of ‘model collapse’, where AI-generated content ends up 
polluting the outputs of subsequent models, leading to 
their progressive deterioration (Shumailov et al., 2024). 
Yet, despite these risks, certain AI content such as AI-
generated songs have proven to be extremely popular and 
have even topped Spotify and Billboard charts (Down, 
2025). A study conducted by Deezer, a digital music 
streaming platform, found that over 50,000 bot-generated 
tracks are being uploaded daily, while the vast majority of 
audiences are unable to distinguish between AI-generated 
music and human-produced music. This underscores the 
need for transparency requirements that clearly label 
AI-generated music as such and ensure that artists are 
fairly compensated for the use of their work as training 
input for AI models (Deezer, 2025). It is also notable how 
rapidly opinions and views on the use of AI are shifting. 
A study of over 1 ,200 independent artists conducted by 
Ditto, a global music distribution company, found that 
the proportion of artists surveyed who had used AI in 
their music projects dropped from 60% in 2023 to 48% 
in 2025, with the primary reason being the lack of 
personal creativity AI offers (Ditto Music, 2025). 
While such figures offer valuable insights into emerging 
trends, they provide only a partial picture, since much 
of the data on how AI is used and its impact on artists 
remain held by private companies with no obligations to 
share user data. Strengthening research and advocating 
for studies in this field are therefore essential as without 
reliable data, policy makers cannot fully assess the 
implications of AI on creative labour and develop informed 
measures to support artists in navigating an increasingly 
AI-dominated landscape.
As GenAI becomes more widespread, it has also 
introduced new challenges for the preservation of 
linguistic diversity. Unsurprisingly, large language 
models perform best in English, as a significant amount 
of their training data comes from the abundance of 
high-quality English-language sources available online 
(Kulesz, 2024). When AI tools are developed and trained 
in a small number of languages, entire populations risk 
being excluded from using and benefiting from them. 
Not only does this deepen existing digital divides, it 
could also accelerate the decline and potential erasure 
of certain languages. It is therefore important to support 
local language initiatives that promote linguistic 
diversity and respond to the specific needs of countries 
and communities. 
Major issues in AI regulation: 
copyright and transparency
Despite all these challenges and opportunities brought 
by AI, current debates on AI regulation in the creative 
sector have largely focused on the unlicensed use of 
creative content drawn from a vast array of books, music, 
artworks and other copyrighted works as training data 
for AI models. While several large datasets are publicly 
available for AI training, the situation is more ambiguous 
when they include copyrighted works that have not been 
licensed for such use (EUIPO, 2025). AI providers claim 
their use is allowed by legal exceptions, such as fair use 
law in the United States, while rights holders from across 
the creative sectors claim that their authorization should 
be requested and a compensation given for training uses. 
As a result, there is a rising number of legal disputes 
between rights holders and GenAI system providers, 
notably in the United States (EUIPO, 2025). 
In September 2025, the AI firm Anthropic agreed to pay 
US$1 .5 billion to compensate book authors whose books 
had been downloaded from pirated websites to train 
its chatbot (Down, 2025), while in Germany, a ruling in 
November 2025 found that OpenAI had infringed German 
copyright laws by training its AI model on copyrighted 
songs by German musicians (Poltz and Heine, 2025). 
Depending on how the various court cases play out, the 
resulting rulings could set important legal precedents in 
other jurisdictions. 
80
For instance, in Asia and the Pacific, where countries 
have taken varied approaches to AI development and 
copyright protection, no major AI litigation has arisen yet. 
Whereas some countries such as Japan and Singapore 
have taken a more liberal approach to copyright rules 
for AI training, the Republic of Korea, where copyright-
related entertainment industries are extremely significant, 
has taken a more proactive approach to protecting the 
interest of rights holders while putting in place enabling 
policies to encourage AI development (Hays, 2024). 
Alternately, some countries have created or are working on 
legislation on the issue, most prominently the European 
Union through its Artificial Intelligence Act, the first-ever 
comprehensive legal framework on AI (Box 3.6). 
BOX 3.6 •  The European Union’s Artificial 
Intelligence Act
The European Union’s AI Act, which entered into 
force in 2024, includes various provisions that have 
implications for the cultural and creative sector, in 
particular related to copyright, transparency and 
labelling obligations for GenAI systems and deepfakes. 
For general-purpose AI models, which are often 
trained on copyrighted material, the AI Act requires a 
policy to respect European Union copyright law and 
transparency about the content used for the training. 
It also requires providers of general-purpose AI models 
to assess systemic risks, including biases. 
The AI Act is deemed the most ambitious AI law 
passed to date. Several countries attempting to enact 
AI laws refer to it, like Chile or the Republic of Korea 
(Mcque et al., 2025). While the AI Act does not 
contain a dedicated focus on cultural and creative 
sectors or cultural expressions, its implementation 
remains relevant for safeguarding the diversity of 
cultural expressions.
Provisions of the AI Act are coming into force 
progressively between 2024 and 2026. The European 
AI Office is responsible for the supervision and 
enforcement of the rules on general-purpose AI models. 
To facilitate their implementation, it has provided a 
Code of Practice. Its chapters on transparency and on 
copyright are designed to help AI system providers 
disclose relevant information on the models they use 
and respect copyright in their activities. 
Source: Mcque et al., 2025
The possibilities for policy action remain the subject 
of extreme scrutiny, legal action and lobbying from AI 
systems providers and cultural and creative sectors as well 
as national economic and political interests. 
More generally, the debate on the ethical and fair use 
of AI revolves around three principles: fair compensation 
(for the use of performers’ voices, likenesses, or images 
in AI-generated content); informed consent (contracts 
must ensure that artists know the specific uses of their 
digital replicas or likenesses and performers must give 
explicit permission for the use of their names, images 
and likenesses in AI applications); and controls (creators 
need to be able to govern how their works, identities and 
creative inputs are used, adapted or reproduced by AI 
systems) (Berg et al., 2025). 
A central issue is the lack of transparency in how 
GenAI systems use content (Kulesz, 2024). Algorithmic 
transparency largely remains unidentified and hence 
unregulated (Ranaivoson and Rozgonyi, 2023). In addition 
to the unlicensed use of copyrighted data to train GenAI 
systems, other potential problems include the inability 
to identify content produced at least partially by such 
systems, and the possibility that outputs may infringe on 
copyright because they are too similar to an existing work. 
In response, the German Commission for UNESCO has 
proposed labelling requirements for input data and final 
output of AI systems (German Commission for UNESCO, 
2024). This way, creators could be informed of the reuse 
of their content, allowing them also to protect their 
copyright, and end-users would know the nature of the 
content to which they are exposed. These are examples of 
actions that could be taken to promote ethically sourced 
and open datasets in order to maintain trust and integrity 
in AI applications (Kulesz, 2024). The Creative Australia 
Principles on GenAI and creative work underscore the 
importance of recognizing and compensating the human 
creative inputs used to build AI applications and to uphold 
the transparency of AI use in creative outputs (Creative 
Australia, 2024).
The lack of connection between AI and culture 
in policy making 
Although AI has recently become a point of attention 
for policy makers all over the world, its connection with 
the creative sector remains largely overlooked. The AI 
Index Report shows that of the 148 bills on AI passed in 
128 countries between 2016 and 2023, only one had 
culture as primary subject matter (Maslej et al., 2024).2 
2. ‘ Arts, culture or religion’ is the specific wording in the study’s typology.
81
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
Civil society is playing a key role in advocating for 
strengthened AI governance and regulation for the 
creative sectors. In Canada, from 2020 to 2023, the 
Coalition for the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, along 
with its members and its partners carried out a number of 
activities to contribute to the development of legislation 
and policies relating to AI that are in line with the 
2005 Convention. This includes a partnership with ALL 
IN which, with 1 ,400 participants, describes itself as ‘the 
largest artificial intelligence event in Canada’, making it 
possible to give culture a place in this major event.
The disconnect between AI and policy agendas is also 
evident at the international level. Despite the proliferation of 
documents and declarations on AI adopted by international 
organizations, most fail to take into account the cultural and 
creative sector (as explored further in Chapter 7). 
UNESCO has made notable efforts to connect AI and 
the cultural and creative sector. The 2021 UNESCO 
Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence 
aims at balancing the benefits and the drawbacks of AI. 
Culture appears as one of the 1 1 areas of policy action.3 
The Readiness Assessment Methodology, which supports 
enforcement of the Recommendation, also includes culture-
related questions, currently focused on the preservation of 
minority and Indigenous languages and cultural heritage. 
Likewise, the 2024 UNESCO Framework for Culture and Arts 
Education includes guidance on implementation related to 
digital technologies and AI. Finally, the Outcome Document 
of the UNESCO World Conference on Cultural Policies 
and Sustainable Development – MONDIACULT 2025 
(29 September – 1 October 2025, Barcelona), in which 
the theme of AI and culture is one of the focus areas, calls 
for advancing AI in ways that foster human creativity. 
It emphasizes supporting the creation, discoverability, 
availability, accessibility, cultural preservation, and exchange 
of diverse and multilingual cultural content of human origin, 
as well as ensuring recognition and appropriate protection 
for artists, communities and cultural professionals. 
Failing to integrate culture into AI governance creates 
significant risks, including a lack of data on AI adoption 
and its impact, insufficient policy responses, and increased 
challenges for artists and creative workers in an already 
precarious sector. As Estela Aranha, a member of the 
United Nation’s High-Level Advisory Body on Artificial 
Intelligence, notes, global coordination is essential when 
it comes to AI regulation since AI technologies surpass 
borders (Mcque et al., 2025). 
3. Its Policy Area 7 (Culture) encourages the application of AI systems where 
appropriate. It calls for the assessment of their cultural impact, notably in terms of 
cultural diversity, discoverability, market concentration, and participation; and the 
evaluation of AI, notably in relation to Intellectual Property. It bids UNESCO Member 
States to promote AI education for professionals in the cultural and creative sector.
UNESCO is well positioned to carry out such an effort, 
given its mandate and initiatives it has undertaken 
in this regard. The UNESCO Reflection Group on the 
diversity of cultural expressions in the digital environment 
also recommends reinforcing UNESCO’s action on 
AI and culture. Furthermore, as a global platform for 
cultural advocacy, the MONDIACULT 2025 Conference 
demonstrated its convening power and ability to sensitize 
high-level policy makers on the critical importance of 
mainstreaming cultural and creative sectors in digital 
and AI policies. In this context, it is also worth noting 
the constructive synergies that characterized the 
Conference’s preparatory process, particularly through the 
independent expert group on AI and culture — established 
at the initiative of UNESCO’s Culture Sector — whose 
report substantially informed the discussions at the 
MONDIACULT 2025 Conference (CULTAI, 2025).
One challenge that is still downplayed is the 
environmental impact of digitalization. The Convention 
should be implemented by Parties and stakeholders to 
develop policies and industrial actions towards digital 
technologies, cultural sectors and climate transition. It 
is even more relevant in combination with the advent 
of AI, as AI is particularly problematic due to its high 
environmental impact, notably through its energy 
consumption (Tabbakh et al., 2024). This is discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 8 of this report.
82
For Parties to the Convention
 ¡ Establish and enforce clear governance frameworks for 
digital culture and AI. These should support ethical, 
inclusive and sustainable development in cultural 
and creative sectors, including technologies used for 
creation and distribution, while protecting creators’ 
Intellectual Property rights. Public bodies responsible 
for cultural policy should also have an explicit role in 
supporting digital innovation, building digital skills and 
literacy, and investing in digital cultural infrastructure.
 ¡ Make the diversity of cultural expressions a core 
consideration in AI legislation, regulations, and policies 
at national and regional levels. This should be done 
in line with international frameworks, including the 
UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of AI, the 
recommendations of the UNESCO Reflection Group 
on the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital 
environment and the MONDIACULT 2025 Conference 
Outcome Document.
 ¡ Increase transparency around AI systems’ use and 
development. This includes clear disclosure of 
training data, in line with open data principles, and 
clear identification of AI-generated outputs. Parties 
should also put in place safeguards to ensure fair 
compensation for creators, require informed consent 
for the use of works, voice and likeness, and give 
creators control over how these are used, adapted 
or reproduced by AI systems, including for training 
purposes.
 ¡ Strengthen collaboration between ministries 
responsible for culture and digital policies, by 
establishing sustained mechanisms for joint planning, 
data sharing and capacity building.
 ¡ Develop practical strategies and action plans that 
respond to how digitization affects creative value 
chains and the needs of artists, cultural professionals 
and organizations. These should identify the policy, 
funding and capacity-building measures needed 
to support digital transformation and improve the 
discoverability of diverse cultural content.
 ¡ Foster strategic public-private partnerships to 
strengthen local digital creative ecosystems. These 
partnerships should support skills development, 
creation, financing, production and visibility for 
local creators by providing grants, fiscal incentives, 
trade fairs and incubator programmes, while also 
incentivizing global streaming platforms to invest 
in local content.
 ¡ Strengthen digital and AI skills across the cultural 
sector. Develop national capacity-building plans to 
improve digital literacy and AI skills among artists 
and cultural professionals, working with local private 
actors and civil society through open and inclusive 
consultations. Update arts education curricula and 
methodologies to reflect new technologies, including 
AI. Promote cultural education initiatives that help 
the public understand digital tools and culturally 
responsible practices.
 ¡ Close digital gaps in access and participation. Partner 
with local cultural associations and education 
institutions to ensure equitable access to digital 
infrastructure, creative tools and training. These efforts 
should include vulnerable and under-represented 
groups, including people with disabilities, Indigenous 
communities and those living in remote or rural areas, 
so that they can enjoy digital cultural content and 
participate actively as creators and producers within 
the digital creative economy. 
 ¡ Raise awareness of the impacts of digital technologies 
on the cultural and creative sector. Promote discussion 
of ethical and fair use of AI, particularly in regional 
and international fora, and strengthen dialogue with 
technology companies, civil society and other private 
actors to identify shared solutions and concrete actions. 
 ¡ Improve data collection on the cultural and creative 
sectors in the digital environment. Work with 
international organizations, researchers, the private 
sector and civil society to strengthen the systematic 
collection and sharing of data, particularly on AI use 
and impacts across the creative value chain, including 
in terms of gender-disaggregated data. Monitor 
domestic digital markets, the diversity of actors and 
access to local content to complement international 
data collection efforts.
RECOMMENDATIONS
83
Chapter 3 • The digital environment: online culture, offline implications  
For civil society and the private sector 
 ¡ Advocate for stronger digital and AI governance 
and regulation for the cultural and creative sector at 
national and global levels. This includes transparency 
requirements for AI systems, such as disclosure of input 
data and labelling of AI-generated outputs, to better 
protect creators’ rights.
 ¡ Raise awareness of how AI affects cultural diversity 
and creative work. Engage cultural and creative 
professionals, organizations and the broader public, 
and promote ethical and culturally responsible 
practices in the digital environment, including 
transparency and fair use of creators’ works.
 ¡ Advocate for better data collection on digital culture. 
Contribute to data collection efforts in partnership 
with public authorities and regional or international 
organizations.
 ¡ Strengthen international cooperation and exchange. 
Support networking, share experiences and encourage 
good practices through policy and legislation related 
to the digitization of cultural content. Promote 
collaborative frameworks that facilitate visibility and 
access to diverse cultural expressions.
 ¡ Support local creators in digital markets. Encourage 
global platforms to invest in original local content 
and to license national catalogues, improving visibility 
for domestic creators and fostering diversity in digital 
cultural markets.
For UNESCO
 ¡ Reinforce UNESCO’s action on AI and culture. This 
could include setting up a global network of experts 
in digital culture and AI, supporting the creation of 
UNESCO Chairs on digital culture and promoting 
research and capacity building, particularly in 
developing countries. Consider developing guidance 
and ethical frameworks for the use of AI in cultural and 
creative sectors, with a focus on transparency, inclusion 
and the protection of creators’ rights.
 ¡ Revise the 2005 Convention’s framework for 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports to improve the collection 
and sharing of information on policies and measures 
related to online discoverability and linguistic diversity. 
This should include clear indicators regarding AI, such 
as the use of AI by artists and measures to support fair 
remuneration.
 ¡ Reinforce cooperation with international partners. 
Work closely with organizations such as the World 
Intellectual Property Organization and the International 
Labour Organization on joint advocacy and knowledge 
sharing to better protect Intellectual Property and 
fair working conditions for creators in the digital 
environment. Expand partnerships to include research 
institutions, civil society and private sector stakeholders 
for joint initiatives on AI transparency, ethical practices 
and capacity building. 
© Victoria Vilasana*
85
Chapter 4
Civil society, voices 
for culture and action
Ayeta Anne Wangusa
© Victoria Vilasana*
86
 ¡ The formalization of cultural associations and 
professional organizations accelerated during the 
2021-2024 reporting period, becoming nearly 
universal in cultural domains such as visual arts (96%) 
and music (94%) but lagging in media arts (76%). 
However, the existence of professional organizations 
and trade unions does not necessarily imply that these 
bodies are operating at full capacity to deliver concrete 
benefits for their creative communities. 
 ¡ The share of Parties reporting capacity-building 
opportunities for civil society organizations increased 
by 15 percentage points (from 71% to 86%) across 
all regions, but growing reliance on national and 
international networking between organizations 
suggests efforts to build resilience in the face of 
emerging challenges. Significant barriers, particularly 
related to funding and visa restrictions, continue to 
hinder international collaboration.
 ¡ Although reported public funding schemes for 
civil society organizations increased globally by 
1 1 percentage points since the previous reporting 
period, these mechanisms are increasingly inadequate 
to meet civil society’s needs. This shortfall is 
compounded by a global decline in cultural funding 
and a shift towards short-term, project-based financing. 
Recent funding cuts at the global level are already 
impacting civil society programmes, with initiatives 
related to human rights, democracy and gender 
equality the most affected. 
 ¡ Civil society organizations often face legal barriers 
to accessing public benefits. In some countries, their 
activities are not legally recognized as serving the 
public interest, limiting their eligibility for public 
funding, tax relief and related support measures. 
 ¡ While international financing mechanisms, such as the 
International Fund for Cultural Diversity, are trying to 
fill these gaps, they are also encountering difficulties 
in terms of financial sustainability.
 ¡ While 91% of Parties report having elaborated policies 
promoting the diversity of cultural expressions in 
consultation with civil society, only 74% include 
examples of civil society measures in their Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports. This suggests a gap between 
consultation and meaningful inclusion. Nevertheless, 
developing countries have made notable advances 
towards parity with developed countries, particularly 
in policy dialogue and policy design.
 ¡ The percentage of Parties submitting a Civil Society 
Organizations Form has dropped, especially in 
developed countries (a decrease of 14 percentage 
points, from 73% to 59%). Combined with the fact 
that measures from civil society account for only 
20% of the total reported, this trend suggests a 
potential weakening of participatory monitoring 
mechanisms at the national level.
 ¡ Civil society organizations continue to play a key role 
in protecting and promoting the diversity of cultural 
expressions by engaging in shared governance, filling 
gaps that are not fully addressed by public functions 
and acting as mediators for marginalized groups, 
especially youth, women, ethnic minorities and 
Indigenous communities. 
 ¡ Civil society organizations’ priorities when 
implementing the Convention vary globally. In 
developing countries, these organizations primarily 
emphasize culture’s role in sustainable development 
(69% of measures reported) and cultural mobility 
(68%). In contrast, organizations in developed 
countries place greater emphasis on human rights 
and fundamental freedoms (41%).
KEY FINDINGS
87
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
Formalization of professional organizations 
accelerated, representing artists and 
cultural professionals in:
96% of countries for visual arts
94% of countries for music
Public funding schemes are inadequate 
to meet civil society’s needs
 ¡ Major disruptions to global funding 
are endangering work on human 
rights, democracy, gender equality
 ¡ Short-term and one-off project-based 
funding models are hindering sustainability 
and continuity
 ¡ Legislative barriers to civil society accessing 
public benefits and funding from abroad
 ¡ International funding mechanisms 
are struggling with financial sustainability
Participatory monitoring 
mechanisms are weakening
Proportion of developed countries 
submitting a Civil Society 
Organizations Form decreased
(73% ➞ 59%)
Barriers to international networking
 ¡ Funding models do not allow civil society 
to devote time and capacity to networking
 ¡ Restrictive visa policies in developed 
countries prevent peer learning
71% ➞ 86%
Countries reported increasing 
capacity-building support for civil society
Priorities vary in implementing the Convention
 ¡ Developing countries focus on sustainable 
development and cultural mobility
 ¡ Developed countries focus on 
human rights and fundamental freedoms
In the face of emerging challenges 
and in efforts to build resilience, 
there is growing reliance 
on national and 
international networking
Ensuring equitable 
participation 
in cultural life
Acting as 
mediators for 
vulnerable groups
Fostering 
transparency 
and public trust
Monitoring 
public 
initiatives 
Cultural policy 
making and filling 
policy gaps
Civil society plays a crucial role in:
Developing countries are involving 
civil society more in 
policy dialogue and designHowever, progress is lagging 
in media arts (76% of countries)
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
88
INTRODUCTION
The Indonesian Culture Congress is a national event held 
every five years to formulate and evaluate Indonesia’s 
cultural strategies, attended by civil society, cultural actors 
and policy makers at the national and regional levels. 
The Congress in 2018 achieved the landmark outcome of 
creating a new Indonesian Strategy for Culture. Building on 
this progress, the 2023 edition of the Congress contributed 
to the development of a 2025-2029 National Action Plan 
for Culture Advancement, which serves as the blueprint 
for Indonesia’s national cultural policy over this period. 
The initiative succeeded in fostering interaction with civil 
society to improve the inclusiveness of culture. 
Twenty years ago, the Convention on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions 
(2005 Convention) enshrined the role of civil society 1 
as a key actor in the development and implementation 
of cultural policies. Article 1 1 of the 2005 Convention 
states that ‘Parties (to the Convention) acknowledge 
the fundamental role of civil society in protecting and 
promoting the diversity of cultural expressions. Parties 
shall encourage the active participation of civil society in 
their efforts to achieve the objectives of this Convention’. 
This commitment has since been reaffirmed by the 
UNESCO World Conference on Cultural Policies and 
Sustainable Development, in its two editions, through the 
MONDIACULT 2022 Declaration and the MONDIACULT 
2025 Outcome Document. 
The Indonesian example above also demonstrates the 
Convention in practice, through the creation of formal 
structures that enable effective civil society engagement in 
policy-making processes. However, around the world, civil 
society organizations are facing a declining environment 
for their work due to a combination of factors, including 
funding cuts, limits on their operations and a diminishing 
global civic space.
Drawing on the Quadrennial Periodic Reports and Civil 
Society Organizations Forms, 2 this chapter illustrates 
how civil society is indeed a key contributor to the goals 
of the 2005 Convention and examines the variety of 
approaches taken by Parties to the Convention to support 
1 . As defined in the 2005 Convention’s Operational Guidelines, civil society means 
‘non-governmental organizations, non-profit organizations, professionals in the culture 
sector and associated sectors, groups that support the work of artists and cultural 
communities’. For the purpose of this report, civil society, therefore, encompasses a 
diversity of actors that includes non-governmental organizations, as well as trade 
unions, professional associations, trade bodies, think tanks and others. 
2. As part of their Quadrennial Periodic Reports, Parties to the Convention are strongly 
encouraged to gather measures implemented by civil society organizations in their 
countries through the Civil Society Organizations Form. For the 2021-2024 cycle, 89 
out of 121 Parties submitted a Civil Society Organizations Form together with their 
Quadrennial Periodic Report. Through this mechanism, civil society organizations 
reported 798 (out of 3,908 total) measures. 
civil society’s role. In light of the growing challenges civil 
society organizations face, this chapter also explores the 
conditions needed to create an enabling environment for 
their engagement and to support their long-term resilience 
in protecting and promoting the diversity of cultural 
expressions.
CIVIL SOCIETY’S ROLE AT THE CENTRE 
OF DYNAMIC POLICY MAKING
This section examines how civil society has participated 
in the implementation of the Convention at both national 
and global levels, in areas including policy dialogue, 
engagement in policy design and monitoring, as well as 
through independent initiatives launched by civil society 
organizations. 
Civil society organizations have an important role to fulfil 
in the conception, implementation and monitoring of 
cultural policies, in a variety of ways. Their involvement can 
improve transparency and accountability; reinforce public 
trust in policy-making processes; promote adaptation to 
changing realities and the revision of policies; provide a 
feedback channel from communities, artists and cultural 
practitioners; and guarantee equitable impact across 
different, often marginalized groups. 
Opening dialogue for collaborative policy making 
Policy-making processes should start with an analysis of 
needs and the establishment of priorities through dialogue. 
Spaces where needs can be identified and discussed among 
governments and civil society, in the form of meetings, 
consultations or working groups, are therefore crucial to 
gather the perspectives of civil society organizations and 
consult their specialized knowledge on the protection and 
promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions. 
In this field, evidence from the Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports shows continuity: 90% of countries report the 
existence of dialogue mechanisms between public 
authorities and civil society organizations for cultural 
policy making and/or monitoring. This proportion 
has not changed in this reporting period compared 
to the previous one (2017-2020). Some disparities, 
however, become visible when distinguishing between 
developing and developed countries – with developed 
countries demonstrating a decrease in reported dialogue 
mechanisms, and developing countries a slight increase, 
as shown in Figure 4.1 . 
89
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Figure 4.1
Proportion of Parties reporting dialogue mechanisms 
between public authorities and civil society 
organizations for cultural policy making and/or 
monitoring, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
As detailed in the Quadrennial Periodic Reports, civil society 
organizations engaging in structured dialogue to support 
policy processes did so through a variety of mechanisms, 
including workshops, forums, committees, working groups 
and task forces. These structured dialogue platforms 
are formally designed to support partnerships between 
civil society and government and to bring civil society 
organizations’ influence to bear on policy making. Several 
developing countries in particular submitted a range of 
measures including diverse approaches toward dialogue 
mechanisms with civil society.
For instance, in Peru, the Ministry of Culture launched the 
‘Citizen Participation in Cultural Industries and the Arts’ 
initiative in 2020, with the aim of strengthening public 
involvement and the transparency of public management 
in the cultural sector. Citizen participation mechanisms 
were implemented, including informative talks, dialogues, 
meetings and information sharing. In 2023, civil society 
participation informed the establishment of Sectoral Working 
Groups for music, theatre and circus, and traditional arts to 
participate in structured policy dialogues and contribute to 
the Draft Law for the Promotion of the Artistic Sector. From 
2020 to 2023, a total of 808 participatory mechanisms 
were implemented.
In February 2024 in the Dominican Republic, the Ministry of 
Culture together with the National Center for the Promotion 
and Development of Non-Profit Associations, launched 
a series of cultural dialogues with non-profit cultural 
associations, to establish an open and consistent channel 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
97%
87%
90%
91%
89%
90%
of communication with civil society. Six dialogue sessions 
were held involving 76 associations who put forward three 
key agendas: regularizing grant payment processes for civil 
society organizations, clarifying eligibility criteria for state 
grants, and prioritizing training activities based on the 
priorities identified by the associations. 
Several countries in Africa also reported a range of 
initiatives through their periodic reports, demonstrating 
increasing formalization of dialogue mechanisms in the 
region, with one example illustrated in Box 4.1 .
At the same time, the rapid growth of digital communication 
has enabled civil society organizations to survey and 
mobilize public opinion more effectively. Digital tools have 
also facilitated greater participation in virtual government 
consultations and cultural debates, a trend accelerated by the 
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, from 2015 to 
2023, the European Union maintained ‘Voices of Culture’, a 
structured dialogue between civil society stakeholders and the 
European Commission, bringing together up to 50 civil society 
representatives through a hybrid modality that included both 
online channels and physical meetings. 
Box 4.1 •  New policy dialogue frameworks 
in Benin
The establishment of the Conseil National des 
Organisations d’Artistes (National Council of Artists’ 
Organizations) in Benin in 2023 has created a 
new framework for consultation with civil society 
organizations. The Council is organized across seven 
cultural domains and maintains a central database of 
sector associations, while also holding regular meetings 
with an advisory committee from the grassroots sector. 
At present, the Council includes 237 associations and 
places an emphasis on the professionalization and 
improvement of working and living conditions for artists 
and cultural professionals. Through this structure, it 
has established dialogue with a range of government 
agencies, set up quarterly meetings with the Arts and 
Culture Development Agency, and contributed to the 
monitoring and revision of several key frameworks 
including the National Culture Policy and the 
development of the Maison de l’artiste (Artist’s House). 
Utilizing its position as a credible interlocutor between 
cultural professionals and public authorities in Benin, the 
Council has also leveraged international support for its 
work, including through the establishment of partnerships 
with the Institut Français and the World Bank.
Source: Benin QPR, 2024; CNOA, 2025
90
Dialogue mechanisms may also take place at territorial 
levels. For example, in Bolivia (Plurinational State of), the 
Municipality of La Paz has held five editions of its Cultural 
Working Days, the last of which took place in 2023. 
These are open participation events for workers in the arts 
and cultural sector, with the twin objectives of involving 
them in strategic policy planning and evaluating existing 
legislation and policies. The 2023 edition of the Cultural 
Working Days focused on the review and adjustment 
of the Municipal Autonomous Law No. 265-319 on the 
Promotion, Safeguarding, Development and Promotion 
of Cultures and the Arts, the renewal of the Intercultural 
Citizen Council for the Planning of Cultures and the Arts, 
the renewal of the Territorial Councils of Culture, and the 
design of strategic planning guidelines.
At the regional level, the Pan-African Cultural Congress of 
the African Union is a triennial gathering of African Union 
member state representatives, cultural policy makers and 
experts, civil society organizations, cultural workers and 
entrepreneurs contributing to policy-making efforts to 
develop the arts and culture sectors on the continent. 
The 2024 Congress was organized under the theme ‘ Arts, 
Culture, Heritage, and Education: Levers for Building the 
Africa We Want’ (African Union, 2024). The initiative 
highlights the importance of continental dialogue 
mechanisms, which can strengthen advocacy efforts at 
the regional level.
International non-governmental organizations also play a 
fundamental role in facilitating dialogue with governments 
concerning the review or adoption of public policies 
related to the cultural and creative sector. For example, the 
International Federation of Coalitions for Cultural Diversity 
works to open dialogue and raise awareness among 
governments about the impact of digital technologies on 
artists and cultural professionals. In 2022, it organized 
the conference ‘Protecting and Promoting the Diversity 
of Cultural Expressions in the Digital Environment: An 
Overview of Legislative Reforms Around the World’, which 
highlighted the state of policy making on the issue.
Meanwhile, dialogue between civil society organizations, 
UNESCO and Parties to the 2005 Convention has also 
been facilitated through civil society’s inclusion in the work 
of the Convention’s governing bodies (Box 4.2). 
Designing policies through participatory processes
A strong enabling environment for civil society should 
involve opportunities for its direct engagement in the design 
and implementation of concrete policies and programmes, 
drawing on these organizations’ technical expertise. The 
2022 edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity 
report found that, while most Parties reported on the 
existence of participatory dialogue mechanisms, civil society 
organizations were still rarely involved in effective decision 
making, thus suggesting a need for more inclusive and 
transparent processes. 
Box 4.2 •  Civil society engagement in the 2005 Convention’s governing bodies
UNESCO, recognizing the key role that civil society plays in implementing the Convention, has engaged in coordination with 
Parties to strengthen the participation of civil society organizations in the work of the Convention’s governing bodies.
As part of this process, since 2016, an item on civil society’s role in the implementation of the Convention has been 
included in the agenda of every session of the Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Additionally, a working meeting has been held between the Bureau of the Committee and 
representatives from civil society organizations, allowing civil society to highlight specific issues of importance to their work. 
One of the most significant activities carried out by civil society organizations in this framework is the Civil Society Forum, 
organized biennially since 2017 in advance of each session of the Conference of Parties to the 2005 Convention. The 
Forum brings together civil society actors working across the areas covered by the Convention and provides a framework 
for dialogue on shared challenges and solutions, as well as for formulating joint recommendations to inform the work of 
the governing bodies. Most recently, the fifth edition of the Civil Society Forum was organized in June 2025. It resulted in 
14 recommendations to UNESCO, the Parties, and civil society, organized around three themes:
 ¡ Education, culture and sustainable development.
 ¡ Advancing civil society organization expertise and participation through strategic collaboration and governance 
mechanisms.
 ¡ Digital, Artificial Intelligence and data.
Source: UNESCO
91
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Other analyses have also emphasized the need to adapt 
governance models to respond to periods of uncertainty 
and change, and to develop models allowing the 
participation of all actors concerned (Bailey et al., 2024). 
In Latin America, an analysis of cultural policy 
developments in the first quarter of the 21st century 
suggests that, alongside the establishment of institutions 
in charge of cultural policy in most countries, a common 
trend has been a recognition of diversity, as a result of 
both internal demands and international frameworks, 
including the 2005 Convention. However, this has not fully 
translated into more horizontal cultural policy frameworks 
engaging artists, cultural professionals and groups in a 
genuine cultural democracy (Nivón Bolán et al., 2024).
In their Quadrennial Periodic Reports, as shown in 
Figure 4.2, a large majority of Parties (91%) report that 
policies and measures that promote the diversity of 
cultural expressions have been elaborated in consultation 
with civil society. This has increased globally by six 
percentage points compared to the previous reporting 
period (2017-2020). While this suggests a very positive 
environment for civil society participation, it must be 
considered in conjunction with other data showing that, 
under the reporting cycle 2021-2024, only 74% of Parties 
included measures from civil society organizations in their 
Quadrennial Periodic Report submissions (Figure 4.3). 
Taken together with recent academic findings discussed 
above, the differences between these two datasets provide 
a more accurate picture of the current state of civil society 
inclusion in policy-making processes.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that periodic report data show 
there has been an increase in civil society participation 
in certain regions, such as Asia and the Pacific (by 23 
percentage points), Africa (16 percentage points) and 
Latin America and the Caribbean (10 percentage points) 
(Figure 4.2). Analysis of reported measures reveals a wide 
range of approaches in these regions supporting civil 
society’s participation in policy design. In Africa, the Central 
African Republic undertook a process of validating the 
national culture policy document through consultation 
with the public, private and civil-society sectors, and 
Guinea included the participation of cultural civil society 
organizations in the development and implementation of 
the new Cultural Policy of the Republic of Guinea. 
In Gabon, with support from the European Union-
UNESCO programme ‘ Advancing evidence-based policies 
and actions and supporting policy making to enhance 
the contribution of creative sectors and industries to 
sustainable development’, a strategy for the cultural and 
creative industries was elaborated in 2020 through online 
consultations with civil society across eight regions and 
seven cultural domains. 
Figure 4.2
Proportion of Parties reporting policies and measures 
promoting the diversity of cultural expressions which 
have been elaborated in consultation with civil society 
organizations, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Through the same programme, in Djibouti, the Agence 
Nationale pour la Promotion de la Culture (National Agency 
for the Promotion of Culture) was supported in creating 
a plan for the growth of the cultural entrepreneurship 
ecosystem, which included mapping and consultations with 
cultural enterprises and civil society. 
An example of participatory policy making in Latin America 
and the Caribbean is illustrated by the case of Chile, 
presented in Box 4.3.
While it is not possible to directly attribute the increased 
involvement of civil society organizations in policy design in 
these countries to only one factor, the increase in training and 
mentoring opportunities reported in many countries from the 
periods 2017-2020 to 2021-2024 (as outlined later in the 
section on capacity development) may have helped to close 
the capacity gap and implement policy-making processes 
more effectively. Other factors, including public trust in 
institutions, decentralized opportunities and increasing 
digital engagement, may have played a role as well. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
100%
81%
70%
76%
88%
93%
85%
75%
97%
93%
86%
89%
96%
91%
92
Civil society engagement in policy monitoring
Civil society also plays a key role in the monitoring of 
cultural policies during and after their implementation, 
including through promoting transparency and fostering 
public trust. In this respect, one key indicator of civil society 
involvement in policy monitoring in the framework of the 
2005 Convention is the proportion of Parties that submit 
a Civil Society Organizations Form – a tool through which 
civil society organizations can contribute to the country’s 
Quadrennial Periodic Report.
Compared to the last reporting period, the data show 
a small global decrease in the proportion of Parties 
including the Civil Society Organizations Form in their 
periodic report submissions (Figure 4.3). At the same 
time, measures reported through submitted Civil Society 
Organizations Forms represent only 20% of the total 
number of measures (798 out of 3,908) from this 
reporting period (2021-2024). Taken together with the 
decline in the proportion of Civil Society Organizations 
Forms submitted by developed countries (which decreased 
by 14 percentage points, from 73% in 2017-2020 to 
59% in 2021-2024, as seen in Figure 4.3), this presents 
cause for concern. These trends could point to less 
consultation and collaboration with civil society in data 
collection processes, or more limited relationships between 
governments and civil society organizations, at least in 
some countries. Future reporting cycles should clarify 
whether this decline continues or is a short-term trend. 
Figure 4.3 
Proportion of Parties that submitted a Civil Society 
Organizations Form as part of their Quadrennial 
Periodic Report, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Analysis of consultation processes reported by Parties in their 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports reveals several mechanisms 
commonly used to formalize civil society involvement 
in policy monitoring. These include multi-stakeholder 
consultation meetings; training workshops attended 
by government ministries and civil society; support and 
coordination provided by research institutes, universities or 
other intermediary organizations; supervision committees 
consisting of both government ministry and civil society 
representatives; and surveys distributed for civil society input. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
73%
79%
77%
59%
82%
74%
Box 4.3 •  Participatory processes in Chile’s cultural policy
The latest Quadrennial Periodic Report submitted by Chile provides several examples of participatory processes in policy 
design. Among them is the design of a new National Arts Education Policy, which seeks to guarantee the right to arts 
education for all people throughout their lifetime, by promoting access to quality training in formal and non-formal education. 
During 2023, the Ministry of Cultures, Arts and Heritage (MINCAP) and the Ministry of Education implemented a 
participatory process of involving civil society in policy development. Ten priorities, which were identified through a forum 
organized by MINCAP , were then discussed in more than 60 working groups in regions across Chile in 2023, including more 
than 600 participants. The resulting Arts Education Policy, which aligns with UNESCO’s 2024 Framework for Culture and Arts 
Education, was adopted in 2024 and will remain valid until 2029. 
Other examples of participatory policy making in Chile include the drafting of 16 regional quinquennial strategies covering 
the 2024-2029 period, and the subsequent elaboration of a national quinquennial strategy for cultural development. Each 
region designed its own participatory process, which involved local cultural agents, unions and associations. Between 70 and 
275 participants took part in each of the in-person meetings held throughout Chile, where they discussed issues including 
access to cultural life, arts and heritage training as well as awareness raising, creative ecosystems and citizen participation in 
the public management of culture.
Source: Chile QPR, 2024; Ministerio de las Culturas, las Artes y el Patrimonio, 2025a, 2025b
93
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Substantial financial and human resources are needed 
to engage civil society organizations in policy monitoring 
through these processes. Germany’s Federal Foreign Office, 
for instance, provided funding to support the participation 
of civil society in the development of Germany’s 2024 
periodic report, which was overseen by the German 
Commission for UNESCO alongside the German Coalition 
for Cultural Diversity. Civil society actors in the cultural 
sector were actively involved through online and in-
person consultations, and their perspectives on the core 
challenges and opportunities for cultural policy development 
were incorporated into the Quadrennial Periodic Report. 
The draft report was also disseminated for comment and 
quality control by civil society organizations before final 
submission to UNESCO.
The Observatory of Cultural Policies in Africa is an example 
of a pan-African civil society organization that focuses on 
monitoring cultural trends, advocating for cultural policies, 
and promoting information exchange, research and 
capacity building (OCPA, 2025). Likewise, at the national 
level, the South African Cultural Observatory, a national 
statistical research project based at Nelson Mandela 
University, reviews public programmes and monitors 
government spending in the cultural sectors (SACO, 2025). 
To enhance civil society’s involvement in policy monitoring 
through periodic reporting, UNESCO has also provided 
support to organizations in several developing countries, 
including Lao People’s Democratic Republic and South 
Sudan (Box 4.4).
Despite these good practices, the lowering global rate 
of Civil Society Organizations Form inclusion in Parties’ 
periodic report submissions, particularly by developed 
countries, demonstrates that such participatory monitoring 
mechanisms are weakening at national levels. This 
underlines the necessity for Parties to first ensure 
transparent and participatory systems of civil society 
monitoring at the national level, which in turn may 
strengthen the pertinence of international information 
sharing instruments and allow for a more accurate 
understanding of the global civil society environment. 
Further attention should accordingly be devoted to this 
area in the coming years, to investigate whether this trend 
continues into future reporting cycles. 
Civil society acting as mediators
Due to the nature of their work, civil society organizations 
often have a unique ability to act as mediators between 
public authorities and citizens. Frequently, Parties rely on 
these organizations’ professional capacities and community-
based relationships to implement measures engaging local 
communities and to animate cultural and community spaces. 
These types of localized support programmes also allow 
civil society organizations to reach marginalized and under-
represented groups. While many such programmes may be 
established by public authorities, civil society organizations 
reported delivering a wide range of self-initiated 
programmes that advanced the Convention’s goals within 
these communities. Analysis of the Quadrennial Periodic 
Report measures from civil society organizations suggest 
that of 375 measures relating to specific groups, the 
most targeted include youth and children, women, ethnic 
minorities and Indigenous communities. 
Box 4.4 •  Support for civil society’s role 
in policy-monitoring processes
Civil society’s role in participatory monitoring of the 
2005 Convention has been strengthened through 
the UNESCO-Swedish International Cooperation 
Development Agency programme ‘Re|Shaping Policies 
for Creativity and Artistic Freedom’, with a focus on 
bringing together artists, civil society and public 
authorities in advance of the Quadrennial Periodic 
Report submissions in 2024.
As part of the initiative, in South Sudan, the civil 
society organization Hope Society implemented a series 
of capacity-building, awareness-raising and cultural 
activities, which included a national training workshop 
on the Convention and the importance of participatory 
policy monitoring, as well as a cultural performance 
featuring local artists, internally displaced women, and 
persons with disabilities – showcasing how creativity 
can promote inclusion in post-conflict communities. 
In Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the civil society 
organization XYZ Art and Culture Center organized the 
‘ Artists’ Talk Series’ in 2022 as part of the consultation 
process for the country’s Quadrennial Periodic Report. 
By organizing sessions across cultural domains, the 
series provided a platform for exchange and became 
a cornerstone initiative for enhancing the visibility, 
professionalization and policy engagement of 
national artists.
The initiatives expanded the cultural policy discourse 
and improved understanding of the 2005 Convention 
in South Sudan and Lao People’s Democratic Republic. 
By fostering broader engagement, they also actively 
promoted the participation of civil society in cultural 
policy monitoring through the countries’ Quadrennial 
Periodic Report submissions.
Source: UNESCO
94
For instance, ‘Key to the City’ is a multi-stakeholder 
movement delivered by the Zimbabwean non-profit House 
of Arts Association; it integrates creativity and cultural 
expressions in development strategies and frameworks 
to support health and well-being. Through partnerships 
with various ministries, youth-led organizations, local 
councils and the police, the initiative addresses young 
people with mental health and addiction challenges 
through creative expressions across the performing arts, 
music, radio programming, podcasting and visual arts. As 
of December 2023, the initiative had benefited almost 
10,000 young people through the grant-making strand, 
with more than 100,000 individuals cumulatively reached 
through online arts programming. 
Meanwhile, the ‘Creating, Knowing and Sharing: The Arts 
and Cultures of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Peoples’ 
programme demonstrates the Canada Council for the Arts’ 
commitment to reaffirming and revitalizing its relationship 
with the First Nations, Inuit and Métis Peoples in Canada. 
The programme provides support to Indigenous individuals 
and groups, Indigenous-led arts organizations, and cultural 
sector development organizations that foster a vital and 
resilient Indigenous arts ecosystem. Collaborations between 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous artists are also encouraged 
and facilitated. Since 2022-2023, the programme has 
supported 74 arts organizations, 27 groups and 267 artists. 
The proximity of civil society organizations to vulnerable 
and under-represented groups allows them to identify and 
analyse obstacles to these groups’ access to and participation 
in cultural life. Debates held during the Civic Agora, a civil 
society forum organized alongside the MONDIACULT 2025 
Conference in Barcelona, for example, emphasized territorial 
and gender inequalities in access to culture. In this respect, 
stakeholders underlined the important role that local 
governments can have in addressing these imbalances and 
called for declarations on cultural rights to be backed with 
adequate resources and effective action. Simultaneously, they 
urged the adoption of a more holistic understanding of the 
place of civil society and cultural organizations in public life, 
going beyond quantitative assessments to recognize their 
civic value and contribution to community development and 
cultural diversity.
By implementing their own initiatives independently, civil 
society organizations can help fill policy gaps that are not 
fully addressed by public functions, often because they lack 
the resources or capacity to respond quickly to emerging areas 
of needs. Therefore, civil society organizations often reflect 
innovative approaches that vary across regions. Accordingly, 
analysis of the 798 measures reported by civil society 
organizations between 2021 and 2024 presents a strong 
variation in the policy areas targeted by civil society between 
developing and developed countries (Figure 4.4). 
Figure 4.4
Share of measures reported by civil society 
organizations under each goal of the 2005 Convention, 
by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
In developing countries, civil society organizations reported 
the highest share of measures contributing toward Goal 3: 
integrate culture in sustainable development frameworks 
(69%), closely followed by Goal 2: achieve a balanced flow 
of cultural goods and services and increase the mobility of 
artists and cultural professionals (68%). 
For example, in Mexico the civil society organization Zorro 
Solar A.C. has implemented measures since 2021 to raise 
awareness of the importance of the creative economy in 
sustainable development through strategic partnerships with 
the UNESCO National Office in Mexico, the Secretariat of 
Economy of Aguascalientes, the municipalities of Calvillo 
and Tepezála, and private sector partners. The initiative 
developed awareness-raising and training activities targeting 
women cultural entrepreneurs, including by organizing the 
Foro Internacional La aportación de las mujeres, desde la 
creatividad y la innovación, para el desarrollo sostenible 
(International Forum on the Contribution of Women through 
Creativity and Innovation for Sustainable Development). 
Global total Developing countries Developed countries
Goal 4: Promote human rights and fundamental freedoms
Goal 3: Integrate culture in sustainable development frameworks
Goal 2: Achieve a balanced /f_low of cultural goods and services and
            increase the mobility of artists and cultural professionals
Goal 1: Support sustainable systems of governance for culture
41%
59%
20%
31%
69%
25%
32%
68%
19%
35%
65%
37%
95
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Meanwhile, Culture and Development East Africa’s 
‘Creative Economy Incubator and Accelerator Initiative’ 
focuses on youth, women and creative enterprises in the 
early stages of artistic development or market entry in the 
audio-visual and design industries. Its main objective is 
to promote inclusive and sustainable tourism and export 
trade. Between 2022 and 2024, the initiative provided 
industry skills training for ten Tanzanian and ten Ugandan 
fashion brands and for five women in animation from East 
African countries. 
In comparison, for developed Parties, the highest share of 
measures reported by civil society organizations are under 
Goal 4: promote human rights and fundamental freedoms 
(41%), followed by Goal 1: support sustainable systems of 
governance for culture (35%). 
‘D-Arts, Project Office for Diversity’, founded in Austria 
in 2023, is one such measure promoting human rights 
and fundamental freedoms for diverse groups. D-Arts 
encompasses a project office and a network of cultural 
institutions, initiatives and actors that promote the 
diversification of the Austrian arts and culture sector by 
challenging discrimination and building equitable spaces 
for marginalized groups, often through dialogue in the 
urban realm. By implementing open calls and its D-Arts 
Sessions, the initiative aims to transform the Austrian 
cultural landscape to be more just and inclusive for all. 
FOSTERING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 
FOR CIVIL SOCIETY ACTORS
While the first section of this chapter demonstrated the 
crucial role civil society organizations play in cultural 
policy making, the second part explores some of the key 
conditions, mechanisms, structures and resources that can 
be fostered to strengthen civil society’s ability to protect 
and promote the diversity of cultural expressions.
It is important to first acknowledge that recent 
developments have contributed to a degrading global 
climate for civil society organizations. A sense that 
global civic space is shrinking has, alarmingly and most 
recently, become more pronounced. This is highlighted, for 
instance, by the EU System for an Enabling Environment 
for Civil Society (EU SEE), a European Union grant-funded 
programme launched at the beginning of 2025 and led by 
a consortium of international civil society organizations, 
together with a network of members in 86 countries 
covering all different regions. 
The EU SEE Early Warning and Monitoring Mechanism, 
which sheds light on critical trends in the enabling 
environment for civil society, has identified several key 
threats since January 2025 amplifying the existing 
challenges facing civil society, particularly in developing 
countries. These threats include reduced funding for civil 
society organizations, shifting donor priorities, an increase 
in restrictions on freedom of expression in the digital 
realm, and other challenges (EU SEE, 2025). Prolonged 
economic crises, particularly those stemming from 
geopolitical conflicts, are further constraining access to 
sustainable funding for many organizations.
Increased formalization of civil society 
in the creative sector
The existence of multiple strong professional bodies 
and trade unions across different cultural domains is a 
particularly important facet enabling the work of civil 
society. These institutions offer multiple benefits, including 
making it easier to act collectively; raising the visibility 
of the sector; organizing and campaigning on issues such 
as working conditions, rights and equity; coordinating 
training, development and standard setting; and providing 
expertise and data for policy-making processes. 
Therefore, legislation that enables and supports the work 
of civil society organizations should include procedures to 
formalize the structure of cultural and creative associations 
and professional organizations, including by facilitating 
their acquisition of legal status. Such legislation can 
help foster more structured dialogue between the public 
and private sectors, support the professionalization and 
enhanced effectiveness of civil society, and strengthen their 
capacity to deliver programmes.
During the 2017-2020 reporting period, between 59% 
and 82% of Parties to the Convention reported the 
existence of professional bodies and trade unions across 
various cultural domains. During the 2021-2024 reporting 
period, this share increased significantly, with a higher 
proportion of Parties reporting professional organizations 
and/or trade unions representing artists and/or cultural 
professionals (Figure 4.5). The increase is consistent across 
all cultural domains, with current levels ranging from 
76% to 96%. These developments indicate a growing 
consolidation and structuring of civil society organizations 
within the cultural and creative sectors.
However, despite this progress reported by the Parties, 
an analysis of the measures reported by civil society 
organizations shows that only 2% relate to unions, 
associations, trade bodies and networks – similar to 
the share of measures related to funding (3%). By 
comparison, these proportions fall far below measures on 
capacity building and education (23%), indicating that 
these are areas where civil society organizations receive 
limited support. 
96
Figure 4.5
Proportion of Parties reporting professional 
organizations and/or trade unions representing artists 
and/or cultural professionals, by cultural domain
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Furthermore, even in countries where professional 
organizations and trade unions do exist, this does 
not necessarily imply that these bodies are operating 
at full capacity to deliver concrete benefits for their 
creative communities. In the African region, this limited 
operational capacity may be partially explained by the 
high levels of informality in the creative sector, which 
limits the ability of artists and cultural professionals to 
organize and participate in collective bargaining for social 
and economic rights (ILO, 2023). 
Figure 4.5 also shows that significant differences persist 
in the existence of professional organizations and trade 
unions across cultural domains. Visual arts are the most 
formalized, with 96% of Parties reporting professional 
organizations, while media arts are the least formalized, at 
76%. This suggests that additional support may be needed 
to encourage the formalization of professional organizations 
covering certain mediums of cultural expressions.
Nevertheless, the increased structuring of civil society 
organizations in the cultural and creative sector is evident 
through examples from the Quadrennial Periodic Reports. 
In the field of cinema and audio-visual arts, for instance, 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
82%
76%
72%
76%
59%
64%
74%
96%
92%
90%
94%
76%
85%
91%
Visual arts
Publishing
Performing arts
Music
Media arts
Design
Cinema/
Audio-visual arts
the Screen Directors Guild of Ireland is the representative 
body for directors involved in the Irish audio-visual 
industry. The Guild promotes the economic and creative 
rights of screen directors, raises awareness of their role and 
status as artists, represents its members nationally and 
internationally, and encourages dialogue between film 
and arts organizations. Since the Guild is recognized as a 
professional association, it receives funding from the Irish 
Film Board and the Arts Council. 
Meanwhile, in Guinea, an initiative is underway to structure 
stakeholders within the cultural sector into umbrella 
civil society organizations and improve governance of 
the sector. During 2021-2024, partners operating in the 
cultural sector signed a series of agreements to support an 
advocacy system that better involves them in developing 
and implementing cultural programmes. These advocacy 
campaigns primarily aim to ensure that their concerns 
are considered in the government’s Programme cadre 
d’appui au secteur de la culture (Framework Programme for 
Supporting the Culture Sector).
In Uzbekistan, the government has made a series of 
commitments to improve the legal framework for the 
development of civil society. A road map was established 
to expand state support for these organizations, to increase 
the number of members in the National Association of 
Non-Governmental Non-Profit Organizations in Uzbekistan, 
and to support the integration of civil society organizations 
in policy making. Likewise, Sudan passed the Law of 
Organizing the Activities of Cultural Groups, which led to 
the creation of a Cultural Activities Organizing Committee 
responsible for evaluating cultural activities and providing 
recommendations. To date, more than 700 cultural 
organizations have been officially registered, and the 
Ministry of Culture, Information and Tourism is working to 
encourage their formalization into unions. 
Building shared governance with civil society
Apart from the structuring of civil society organizations, 
governance models also play a key role in the creation 
of partnerships involving civil society. Partnerships may 
involve public authorities entrusting leadership or specific 
responsibilities within projects or initiatives to civil society 
organizations or individuals within them. 
For instance, the National Council for Culture in Slovenia 
has the task of acting as an advisory body and providing 
expert opinions and recommendations to public 
authorities on the country’s cultural policy and strategy. 
The Council is made up of experts and representatives of 
cultural disciplines, with the role of reviewing proposed 
legislation, launching research studies and developing 
initiatives to address issues in the sector. 
97
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Likewise, in Oman, a portfolio of partnership agreements 
between the Ministry of Culture, Sports, and Youth and 
civil society organizations has allowed for the support and 
delegated delivery of more than 35 cultural activities and 
events between 2020 and 2024. This included the Oman 
Film and Theatre Society, Omani Society for Writers and 
Literati, Cultural Club and Literary Forum. 
In other instances, government and civil society share roles 
by working together, in what could be termed ‘shared’ or 
‘cooperative’ governance, to promote freedom of artistic 
expression, ensure citizen participation and enhance 
accountability. Coordination and cooperation with civil 
society organizations can take place at different levels of 
government including local, provincial and national. 
For example, Brazil’s Cultura Viva National Policy, 
launched in 2004, sets out a system for shared 
governance between the public administration, civil 
society and local communities. Roles and responsibilities 
for cultural policy implementation are decentralized to 
the state and municipality levels, reflective of a broader 
strategy of cultural decentralization in Brazil. The policy 
certifies cultural collectives and entities as Cultural Points 
or Hubs, which enables them to access funds allocated 
in public tenders. Currently, Cultura Viva is present in all 
Brazilian states and approximately 1 ,400 municipalities. 
Over the past 20 years, approximately 3,500 Cultural 
Points were supported. 
Another example of a cooperative governance model 
including civil society can be found in Timor-Leste (Box 4.5).
Opportunities for capacity development
Capacity-building initiatives, including through 
programmes to develop civil society organizations’ 
skills and capabilities, is a key approach used by public 
authorities to create an enabling environment for civil 
society’s work.
Accordingly, a large majority of Parties to the Convention 
(86%) report that public authorities in their countries 
organize or support training and mentoring opportunities 
for civil society organizations involved in the promotion 
of the diversity of cultural expressions – to build skills in 
communication, advocacy and fundraising. There has also 
been an increase in the proportion of Parties reporting 
such capacity-building measures since the 2017-2020 
reporting period, rising from 71% to 86%. This increase 
is present across every region, with the greatest increase 
in Asian and Pacific States (up by 36 percentage 
points). This development appears to signal increasing 
awareness by Parties of the need to strengthen skills and 
capacities in the cultural and creative sector in the face of 
emerging challenges.
For instance, the ‘Together for Local Transformation 
Programme’ was delivered by the Praia Council and 
Decentralization Fund in Cabo Verde. It aimed to 
decentralize municipal services and strengthen civil 
society’s capacity and skills for active participation in 
local development. In Panama, as part of the European 
Union-UNESCO programme on advancing evidence-based 
policies, UNESCO and the Inter-American Development 
Bank supported the newly established Ministry of Culture 
in providing training for women cultural entrepreneurs in 
the creative economy.
Box 4.5 •  Creation of a regional cultural 
alliance in Lautém, Timor-Leste
In Timor-Leste, the civil society organization Many 
Hands International received funding from the UNESCO 
International Fund for Cultural Diversity in 2024 to 
launch an initiative to create a cultural alliance in 
the municipality of Lautém. The coalition, comprising 
representatives from government, communities and 
civil society, aims to promote culture as a driver of 
sustainable development through a community-
empowerment approach. 
Following a survey that identified community interest 
in locally driven cultural development, the Alliance 
received support from local government, which agreed 
to participate. Working groups were established, and 
stakeholders engaged in multiple rounds of community 
feedback to design the 2025-2035 Lautém Cultural 
Strategy, a sustainable cultural development plan for 
the region. Implemented in part by the Lautém Cultural 
Alliance, the plan emphasizes the value of decentralized 
governance through the active involvement of 
communities and civil society, as well as the ability of 
culture to diversify local economies. 
Many Hands International hopes the foundation of the 
Lautém Cultural Alliance will be the first step toward 
the creation of a network of regional-level alliances 
across the country, and eventually the establishment of 
a national cultural alliance representing the entirety of 
Timor-Leste. 
Source: Timor-Leste QPR, 2024; UNESCO, 2025b
98
Figure 4.6
Proportion of Parties with public authorities 
that organize or support training and mentoring 
opportunities in communication, advocacy or 
fundraising for civil society organizations involved 
in promoting the diversity of cultural expressions, 
by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Meanwhile, in Denmark, the organization Kulturelle Samråd 
(Cultural Council) supports organizations within the cultural 
sector through capacity building, training, networking and 
sharing of good practices. This includes training on the 
implementation of an online benchmarking tool to support 
civil society organizations in assessing their social impact. 
Initiated in Denmark, the programme has now expanded to 
partner countries in the Nordic and Baltic regions. 
In Togo, the organization Culture-Développement received 
funding through the UNESCO-Aschberg Programme 
for Artists and Cultural Professionals to accelerate the 
implementation of the Law No. 2016-012 on the Status of 
the Artist, which had previously been unevenly applied. 
The initiative trained 1 17 artist ambassadors on the 
relevant legal frameworks in regional workshops; they then 
further disseminated the knowledge gained to a total of 
4,680 cultural actors nationwide. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
73%
71%
50%
73%
75%
75%
71%
92%
82%
86%
84%
94%
82%
86%
The Quadrennial Periodic Reports also contain examples 
of strengthening capacity building through networks and 
cooperation. For instance, in Sweden, Ideell kulturallians  
(Ideal Cultural Alliance) is an umbrella organization 
for cultural civil society organizations. In collaboration 
with 21 member organizations, the association works to 
coordinate responses to common issues within the sector, 
pursue debate, spread knowledge and influence the 
public sector and society at large. 
In a context of diminishing funding and more restrictive 
legislation, networking among cultural organizations 
is emerging as an increasing need, at both national 
and international levels, as a way to strengthen their 
collective capacity. For example, participants in the Civic 
Agora, which was organized in the framework of the 
MONDIACULT 2025 Conference, emphasized the need for 
funding models that enable civil society organizations to 
devote time and capacity to learning and networking as 
part of their regular activities. The debates also underlined 
the challenges posed to international networking by 
restrictive visa policies in developed countries, which 
prevent peer learning and weaken appreciation for the 
diversity of cultural expressions.
At the fifth edition of the Convention’s Civil Society 
Forum held in June 2025, networking was considered 
crucial to support civil society engagement; at the same 
time, the Forum recognized that many organizations from 
developing countries and marginalized communities still 
struggle to access such partnership opportunities. In this 
respect, the Forum recommended the creation of regional 
and thematic peer learning networks to foster regional 
and inter-regional collaboration. Therefore, more targeted 
support for such networks to reinforce sustainable cultural 
ecosystems and civil society engagement in policy are 
likely to be needed for the coming years. 
Intensified funding challenges
Sustainable funding is key to enabling cultural civil 
society organizations to operate independently and 
respond rapidly to new and evolving challenges. The 
Quadrennial Periodic Report data from the 2021-2024 
period show an optimistic picture across Parties to the 
Convention. At the global level, 89% of Parties report 
the existence of public funding schemes that support the 
involvement of civil society organizations in promoting 
the diversity of cultural expressions. This proportion rose 
by 1 1 percentage points since the previous reporting 
period. This was consistent across both developed (98%) 
and developing countries (84%). 
99
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Figure 4.7
Proportion of Parties with public funding schemes 
supporting civil society organizations’ involvement 
in promoting the diversity of cultural expressions, 
by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
For instance, the goal of the expanded 2024 ‘Culture 
Funds for Citizen Projects’ by the National Secretariat of 
Culture in Paraguay is to promote citizen participation in 
cultural revitalization and decentralization. The funds have 
supported over 92 projects led by civil society that span a 
range of cultural domains, including those strengthening 
cultural spaces and centres as catalysts of cultural, social 
and economic development. Similarly, the ‘Culture Center+’ 
subsidy programme delivered by the National Centre 
for Culture in Poland has the goal of better integrating 
cultural centres in the life of the local community and 
building the capacity of community-driven cultural activity. 
Between 2020 and 2023, the programme supported the 
participatory activities of 270 community centres and the 
implementation of 1 ,000 community initiatives.
Likewise, in Tunisia, the Ministry of Cultural Affairs has 
committed to setting up an annual funding mechanism 
for cultural associations under which grant applications 
are examined by a multidisciplinary commission according 
to eligibility criteria that were revised in 2023 and 
inspired by the objectives and guiding principles of the 
2005 Convention. The Ministry of Culture in Estonia 
provides a grant programme to support creative freelancers, 
funded by the state budget and distributed by professional 
artistic associations. Grants are paid once a year to 
recognized artistic associations based on their number of 
members, and can be used to fund creative activities and 
related training. Creative support through this scheme was 
vital to support freelancers who lost income due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
87%
73%
78%
98%
84%
89%
However, even if the number of Parties reporting public 
funding mechanisms has increased, this does not 
necessarily imply that the absolute amount of funding 
available for civil society organizations has grown overall, 
nor that such mechanisms are adequate to meet their 
needs. Rather, as data presented in Chapter 1 of this 
report show, at a global level funding for the cultural and 
creative sector appears to be declining. 
At the fifth edition of the 2005 Convention’s Civil 
Society Forum, civil society representatives also confirmed 
the escalating difficulty in securing adequate and fair 
funding, due in particular to a shift toward short-term and 
one-off project-based financing models. In this respect, 
a lack of robust data on the economic impact of the 
cultural sectors, along with the minimal representation 
of culture in the Sustainable Development Goals, was 
identified as hampering cultural organizations’ ability 
to advocate for financing and compete with other 
development sectors for funding.
This image of a degrading funding environment for civil 
society is also reinforced by a survey of 54 organizations 
published by EU SEE in March 2025, which showed 
two-thirds of civil society organizations (67%) directly 
affected by new funding cuts, with 40% of them losing 
25% to 50% of their budgets, forcing them to reduce 
programmes, cut staff or close operations. Human 
rights, democracy and gender equality programmes 
were reported to be facing the most severe disruptions. 
Approximately 69% of civil society organizations stated 
that they were actively seeking alternative donors or 
partnerships due to increasing challenges to existing 
funding structures. 
In this regard, it is important to highlight that data 
presented in the Quadrennial Periodic Reports may not 
fully reflect these current realities, at least partially due to 
the timeframe of the reporting period (2021-2024), which 
concluded before major disruptions to the global funding 
landscape in 2025.
In this funding context, civil society organizations are 
engaging in advocacy efforts to raise awareness about the 
importance of public investment in culture. For instance, 
the civil society organization Selam has launched the 
‘Connect for Culture Africa’ initiative in collaboration 
with the African Union and supported by the Swedish 
Government, with branches in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 
and Nairobi, Kenya. The initiative integrates advocacy 
efforts at both regional and national levels, fostering 
a multi-stakeholder network of cultural advocates 
to raise awareness about how culture can promote 
inclusive, peaceful and sustainable social and economic 
development. 
100
Its aim is to strengthen cultural actors’ ability to influence 
and participate in African countries’ budget processes, 
and to increase the allocation of public funding to culture 
to at least 1% of the national budget in half of all 
African countries by 2030.
However, even when public financial support for culture 
is available, accessing such benefits can be another 
major issue for civil society organizations (CDEA, 2024). 
For instance, in certain countries, cultural civil society 
organizations may not be eligible for tax breaks or tax 
relief, as their activities are not legally recognized as 
responding to the public interest. Furthermore, some 
countries have established public funds to support 
private, for-profit organizations in the cultural and 
creative sector, which civil society organizations are not 
authorized to access.
In this respect, funding on an international level has 
the potential to play a key role, but this landscape 
too is currently threatened, as many countries cut 
back on international aid to support civil society or 
adopt legislation that makes it harder for civil society 
organizations to receive financing from abroad (Firmin 
et al., 2025; Pousadela, 2025). These sudden shifts in 
the availability of international funding often hinder civil 
society organizations’ ability to ensure the sustainability 
or continuity of their projects in the long term. 
Among the limited number of international funding 
mechanisms that support civil society engagement in 
the cultural and creative sector, one notable source is 
the UNESCO International Fund for Cultural Diversity, 
established under Article 18 of the 2005 Convention. 
Along with other international funding, this UNESCO 
Fund plays an important role in filling gaps in the 
financing of civil society’s work at the national level, with 
68% of funded projects during the period 2017-2024 
benefiting non-governmental organizations, for a total 
amount of over US$4.5 million in funding. An example of 
one such project implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
is presented in Box 4.6. 
However, the most recent external evaluation of 
the Fund pointed to several concerns related to its 
financial sustainability, including a need for increased 
contributions from a wider range of donors, given its 
reliance on a small number of countries for the majority 
of its funding (UNESCO, 2025a). These difficulties 
encountered by the Fund are yet another indicator 
suggesting insufficient public funding for culture at the 
global level. 
Box 4.6 •  Obala Art Centar, measuring the 
impact of the Sarajevo Film Festival
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the UNESCO International 
Fund for Cultural Diversity supported a comprehensive 
study of the Sarajevo Film Festival’s contribution to 
social and economic development. Carried out by Obala 
Art Centar, the study gathered data on the Festival’s 
participation and economic impact, its effects on 
tourism and promotion of positive social values, as well 
as returns on public and private investment. In line with 
advocacy efforts, the main findings of the study were 
subsequently presented to key public stakeholders.
Based on the knowledge generated, the project 
contributed to the creation and implementation of 
a tax incentive for film production in the region. In 
2021 , the government of the Sarajevo Canton allocated 
150,000 euros for a 30% cash rebate on eligible 
audio-visual production costs, ultimately granting the 
incentive to several productions. During a 2022 press 
conference, the study was recognized as a key piece 
in the process of analysing and changing the city’s 
cultural policy. The project illustrates how targeted 
international financing can fill funding gaps within 
national cultural policy cycles and serve as an impetus 
for further engagement and support mechanisms from 
local authorities. 
Source: UNESCO
Together, these trends point to an increasingly fragmented 
system of funding at the national and global levels for 
supporting civil society organizations’ key role in protecting 
and promoting the diversity of cultural expressions. In 
this context, the fifth edition of the Civil Society Forum 
presented several key recommendations, including for civil 
society to pool fundraising resources, develop community 
grant proposals and leverage private financing, as well 
as for funders to reduce administrative burdens, update 
funding criteria and provide access to cultural spaces and 
technical assistance. 
101
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
For Parties to the Convention
 ¡ Provide a strong enabling environment for civil society 
organizations’ crucial role to protect and promote the 
diversity of cultural expressions. Implement supportive 
legislation, adequate capacity-building programmes and 
sustainable funding opportunities.
 ¡ Establish or reinforce structured dialogue mechanisms with 
civil society organizations to ensure they foster transparent 
and participatory policy making. Support civil society’s 
direct engagement in the design and implementation of 
cultural policies.
 ¡ Review and mitigate restrictive visa policies and 
other mobility barriers that hinder peer learning and 
weaken international networking among civil society 
organizations. Support their balanced geographical 
representation at sessions of the Convention’s governing 
bodies by providing financial or in-kind assistance, in 
line with recommendations from the fifth edition of the 
2005 Convention’s Civil Society Forum.
 ¡ Strengthen civil society participation in policy monitoring 
by formalizing its regular involvement in future reporting 
cycles, including through systematic use of the Civil Society 
Organizations Form and its active engagement in the 
drafting of Quadrennial Periodic Reports.
 ¡ Leverage the mediating role of civil society organizations 
by adopting policies and measures that support their 
work with marginalized groups, improve data collection 
on barriers to cultural participation and encourage 
partnerships with local governments. Where appropriate, 
adopt shared or cooperative governance models that place 
civil society in key leadership roles.
 ¡ Formalize cultural and creative associations or professional 
organizations by establishing clear procedures for their 
recognition, especially within less formalized cultural 
domains. Where such organizations already exist, support 
their effective operation and their ability to advocate for the 
social and economic rights of their creative communities.
 ¡ Establish public funding mechanisms to ensure adequate 
and fair financing for civil society’s work. Funding schemes 
should be long-term, recognize the value of learning and 
networking, and use transparent criteria to ensure the 
continuity of civil society’s work. 
 ¡ Ensure legal recognition of civil society’s public-
interest contributions to cultural life, and include these 
organizations in related support measures, such as tax 
relief and public funds. 
 ¡ Contribute to the International Fund for Cultural Diversity, 
to sustain its continued role as one of the few mechanisms 
at the international level financing the work of civil society 
in advancing the goals of the 2005 Convention.
 ¡ Monitor and improve the operating environment for civil 
society organizations by regularly assessing challenges 
related to funding, legal frameworks, skills development and 
their overall ability to contribute to sustainable governance 
for culture.
For civil society organizations
 ¡ Strengthen cooperation and networking among civil 
society organizations, at national and international levels, 
to enhance sustainable resource mobilization, increase 
resilience in the face of funding cuts and reinforce collective 
advocacy for civil society’s role in promoting the diversity of 
cultural expressions. 
 ¡ Develop regional and thematic peer learning networks to 
foster inter-regional collaboration, especially for organizations 
from developing countries and marginalized communities 
that struggle to access partnership opportunities.
 ¡ Diversify funding sources, develop new funding strategies 
and leverage private financing, while pooling limited 
fundraising resources. 
 ¡ Advocate for increased public investment in culture 
by raising awareness of the civic value of civil society 
organizations and their contributions to community 
development.
 ¡ Assess internal skill needs for organizational development 
and policy engagement, to inform the design of capacity-
building programmes and to strengthen advocacy for 
enhanced support.
 ¡ Participate in the work of the Convention’s governing bodies 
to strengthen the transparency, accountability and inclusivity 
of global cultural governance.
For UNESCO
 ¡ Refine monitoring and reporting frameworks by 
developing more nuanced indicators. For example, more 
attention should be given to indicators that concretely 
monitor whether (and how) civil society organization 
recommendations are being taken forward in cultural policy-
making processes. 
 ¡ Continue supporting international networking and peer-
to-peer exchange among civil society organizations in 
the cultural and creative sector, including by facilitating 
their active involvement in the work of the Convention’s 
governing bodies and its Civil Society Forum.
 ¡ Strengthen longitudinal monitoring and analysis of the 
operating environment for civil society, particularly in light 
of declining funding, regulatory constraints and shrinking 
civic space, in order to better assess how these factors 
will continue to affect civil society’s capacity to engage in 
cultural policy making over time. 
RECOMMENDATIONS

© Roberto Reposo/Unsplash.com
ACHIEVE A BALANCED 
FLOW OF CULTURAL 
GOODS AND SERVICES 
AND INCREASE THE 
MOBILITY OF ARTISTS 
AND CULTURAL 
PROFESSIONALS
Goal 2
© Luciana Abait, 
Off the map*
105
Chapter 5
The shifting borders 
of cultural mobility 
Marie Le Sourd and Rana Yazaji
© Luciana Abait, 
Off the map*
106
 ¡ Experimental forms of mobility are emerging to address 
pressing issues such as forced displacement, the climate 
crisis and structural inequalities. In particular, mobility 
frameworks supporting at-risk and displaced artists 
are providing strong, flexible models characterized by 
open-ended, process-based and modular approaches 
that emphasize long-term artistic development and 
professional integration. 
 ¡ Countries are developing in-border mobility initiatives 
to enhance the visibility and capacity of less connected 
or under-represented artists. However, this should not 
reduce investment in international cultural mobility. 
 ¡ Bilateral and regional treaties, including international 
cultural cooperation agreements, have created 
opportunities for signatory countries to promote 
cultural exchange among artists and cultural 
organizations. 
 ¡ Civil society organizations continue to be active 
in supporting artistic mobility, advocating to raise 
awareness among public bodies, providing access to 
information and resources through Mobility Information 
Points and developing innovative mobility programmes. 
However, greater synergies with Parties and funders 
should be encouraged to avoid duplication of efforts 
and prevent the reinforcement of inequalities in access, 
particularly in the context of South-South mobility.
 ¡ The COVID-19 pandemic has inspired new ways to 
reimagine artistic mobility, including greener, digital 
and hybrid approaches. However, if not contextualized, 
these models can become additional obstacles for 
artists and cultural professionals from developing 
countries or less accessible regions and territories. 
 ¡ Mobility is about freedom of movement and expression, 
and it equally concerns artists from all genders, all 
abilities and all contexts, war and conflict zones 
included.
 ¡ Imbalances in public support for inward and outward 
mobility, observed in the previous edition, persist. 
Parties to the Convention remain far more engaged 
in supporting outward mobility than inward mobility, 
especially in Western European and North American 
countries (96% for outward compared to 38% for 
inward). This disparity is reflected both in public 
funding allocations and in the number of policies 
and measures Parties report. 
 ¡ Visa requirements remain the main structural barrier 
to the movement of artists and cultural professionals 
from developing countries, as new and increasingly 
stringent regulations are being implemented at points 
of departure, arrival and transit. Cooperation between 
ministries of the interior, foreign affairs and culture is 
therefore crucial to streamline visa processes.
 ¡ Preferential treatment still remains poorly understood 
and under-implemented in developed countries. 
However, a higher proportion of developing countries 
(56%) report providing public funds to specifically 
support South-South mobility for artists from other 
developing countries. To strengthen such measures, 
developed countries that are Parties to the 2005 
Convention should engage more actively and work in 
closer coordination with civil society organizations. 
KEY FINDINGS
107
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
56%
of developing countries fund
South-South mobility
96%
of developed 
countries reported supporting
outward mobility
80%
of opportunities
in-person
Only 38%
support
inward mobility
Only 4.3%
fully online
Visas
remain the
primary obstacle
to cultural mobility
Innovative mobility measures 
 ¡ Digitizing visa processes
 ¡ Direct ministerial coordination
 ¡ Bilateral/regional cultural cooperation 
agreements
Re-emerging mobility trends post COVID-19 Shifting landscape of cultural mobility 
Civil society leads on:
 ¡ Training
 ¡ Advocacy
 ¡ Access to information through 
Mobility Information Points
49.3% 
of mobility calls supported 
individual residencies
 ¡ Addressing forced displacement, 
environment and mental health
 ¡ Adapting to hybrid, 
in-border and 
regional formats
NetworkingTrainingResourcesFundingWork
Fair cultural mobility ensures equitable access to: 
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
108
INTRODUCTION
‘We have no choice than to be international.’ This statement 
by Heba Hage-Felder, made during the online discussion on 
28 August 2020 ‘How to Be Together? Conversations on 
International Exchange and Collaborations in the Performing 
Arts’,1 illustrates the complexity and multifaceted nature 
of mobility in the arts and cultural sector, which have 
become more visible and exacerbated since the onset of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath.
Mobility offers a wide range of professional opportunities 
that are part of the artistic process, such as residencies, 
presenting work at festivals or markets, networking with 
peers, learning from other practices and building capacity 
through specific training. In this context, the Operational 
Guidelines on Preferential Treatment for Developing 
Countries (Article 16) of the Convention on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions 
(2005 Convention) continue to provide a relevant source 
for understanding the concept of mobility.2 While some 
artists engage in mobility for professional development, for 
many, the need for mobility can be driven by necessity. This 
could be due to various factors, such as economic, political 
or structural issues; a lack of training or opportunities in 
the local cultural sector; or, in more extreme cases, forced 
migration due to political oppression, wars or conflicts.
This chapter anchors its discussions in an evolving and 
dynamic understanding of cultural mobility patterns. 
An updated definition of mobility will be introduced 
that considers how mobility should be understood as a 
cornerstone of equitable international cooperation in the 
arts, as it is deeply intertwined with broader systemic issues, 
including access to resources (financial, digital, etc.), wars 
and conflicts, gender-based discrimination, structural racism 
and other forms of inequality.
Addressing these challenges requires a comprehensive and 
inclusive approach, ensuring that cultural mobility policies 
reflect the realities of artists and cultural professionals 
worldwide, as well as a holistic lens both in terms of analysis 
and policy in order to generate balanced cultural mobility 
flows and avoid reinforcing inequalities. 
Against the backdrop of the 2005 Convention, this chapter 
explores these issues, offering updated insights into policies 
1 . An event organized by Tanz im August, HAU Hebbel am Ufer and Zürcher Theater 
Spektakel: https://www.theaterspektakel.ch/en/article/how-to-be-together. 
2. The 2005 Convention’s Operational Guidelines on Preferential Treatment for 
Developing Countries, Article 3.3.2 (iv) ‘[T]aking measures to facilitate the mobility 
of artists, other cultural professionals and practitioners, and, in particular, to 
favour those from developing countries who need to travel to developed countries 
for professional reasons. These measures should include, in conformity with the 
applicable provisions in this respect, for example: simplification of procedures for 
issue of visas regarding entry, stay and temporary travel; lower cost of visas.’
and practices that can foster more equitable and sustainable 
mobility in the arts and cultural sector. The overall objective 
of this chapter is therefore to examine the extent to which 
the policy framework established by the 2005 Convention 
has enhanced and expanded transnational mobility for 
artists and cultural professionals, with a particular focus 
on developments over the past four years. To this end, the 
present chapter, based on the Convention’s Monitoring 
Framework, traces developments regarding policies adopted 
and measures implemented.
Additionally, this chapter addresses the changing realities 
related to the mobility of artists and cultural professionals, 
the extent to which current policies, measures and actions by 
Parties and civil society organizations address these realities, 
and the types of mechanisms that would be needed to fully 
endorse today’s diverse cultural mobility patterns. Ultimately, 
the chapter examines the ‘shifting borders’ of artistic mobility 
twenty years after the adoption of the 2005 Convention. It 
demonstrates that cultural mobility in the contemporary world 
is being reshaped by various factors, including the impact 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, geopolitical shifts and conflicts, 
changing migration policies, economic challenges, digital 
transformation, environmental considerations and evolving 
cultural and institutional policies.
STRUCTURAL BARRIERS TO EQUITABLE 
MOBILITY: POLICIES AND REGULATIONS
The policies, measures, operational programmes and 
funding mechanisms that Parties to the 2005 Convention 
and civil society have implemented to support artistic 
mobility provide a useful starting point. Drawing on both 
primary and secondary data analysis, the section adopts a 
comparative perspective on inward and outward mobility. 
This approach enables an understanding of both global 
and regional levels, helping to identify broader trends 
and regional specificities, and ultimately informing policy 
recommendations.
In this context, ‘inward mobility’ refers to the movement of 
artists and cultural professionals into a country or region 
for purposes such as residencies, collaborations, exhibitions 
or participation in events. It is shaped by policies and 
conditions that either facilitate or hinder the reception 
of international artists, including visa regimes, funding 
schemes and access to information.
Conversely, ‘outward mobility’ captures the capacity of 
domestic artists and cultural professionals (nationals of 
the said country or legally based residents) to engage 
internationally by travelling abroad. This includes access 
to opportunities such as touring, study visits, international 
showcases, or participation in transnational networks. 
109
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
It is influenced by domestic support structures, such as 
grants, mobility programmes and training, as well as 
by external barriers such as entry restrictions, political 
constraints or lack of international visibility. 
A third essential concept introduced by the 2005 
Convention is ‘preferential treatment’. This concept has 
important implications not only for mobility patterns but 
also for the equitable flow of cultural goods and services. 
As such, it is explored here, as well as in Chapters 6 and 7.
Policies and measures supporting artists’ 
and cultural professionals’ mobility
Globally, 90% of Parties to the 2005 Convention report 
implementing policies and measures to support the 
outward mobility of artists and cultural professionals, with 
Western European and North American Parties reporting 
the highest proportion at 96%, as shown in Figure 5.1 . By 
contrast, support for inward mobility is significantly lower, 
with only 51% of Parties reporting policies to facilitate 
the entry of foreign artists and cultural professionals 
(Figure 5.2). A comparable gap exists in funding, with 
84% of Parties reporting public funds supporting outward 
mobility while only 61% report funding to support inward 
mobility (Figure 5.3). This disparity underscores a stronger 
commitment to enabling outward mobility than to fostering 
reciprocal opportunities for international artists.
Across the different regions, Parties in Western Europe 
and North America recorded the lowest percentage 
(38%) for implementing specific visa policies or other 
cross-border measures to support inward mobility (Figure 
5.2). However, Western European and North American 
countries reported the highest rates of implementing 
work permit regulations for incoming artists and cultural 
professionals (63%), which may point to the existence of 
well-established regulatory frameworks governing artistic 
labour more broadly. While this may ensure professional 
recognition and labour rights, it does not necessarily reflect 
a proactive intention to encourage inward mobility for 
temporary cross-border purposes. Rather, it highlights a 
regulatory environment that, while comprehensive, may 
not be matched by policies explicitly designed to attract 
or support incoming artists.
Outward mobility policies vary greatly, with some closely 
linked to cultural diplomacy actions and visibility. Since 
2018, the Gambian Government has, for instance, 
appointed artists as cultural ambassadors, issuing selected 
artists with diplomatic passports, including artists in 
official delegations to foreign trade fairs and issuing notes 
verbales to facilitate the issuance of visas for artists. 
Figure 5.1
Proportion of Parties reporting policies and measures 
supporting the outward mobility of artists and cultural 
professionals, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) 
Figure 5.2
Proportion of Parties reporting specific visa policies 
or other cross-border measures supporting the inward 
mobility of foreign artists and cultural professionals, 
by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Western European and
North American States
Latin American and Caribbean States
Eastern European States
Asian and Paci/f_ic States
Arab States
90%Global total
African States
92%
87%
86%
90%
90%
96%
Global total 51%
67%
40%
79%
65%
40%
38%Western European and
North American States
Latin American and Caribbean States
Eastern European States
Asian and Paci/f_ic States
Arab States
African States
110
Box 5.1 •  La Fondation H: supporting artists’ mobility across Africa and beyond
La Fondation H (Foundation H), founded in Antananarivo, Madagascar, in 2017 , through the initiative of the entrepreneur 
and patron Hassanein Hiridjee, has been recognized as a public-interest organization since 2018. 
The Foundation runs programmes that support the careers of artists from Africa and its diasporas, facilitate public access to 
art, and actively contribute to the development and structuring of the artistic scene in the Indian Ocean region. Since 2021 , 
La Fondation H has hosted an artist residency in Antananarivo, which has welcomed more than 12 international artists from 
Comoros, Mauritius, Morocco, Zimbabwe and other countries.
Additionally, its Mizaha programme in Paris has, since 2020, hosted an average of five artists per year from countries in the 
Global South, including Madagascar, Mali and Mauritius and from their diasporas in France and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom), for instance.
The programmes in both Madagascar and France receive funding from the Foundation, which financed, for instance, 
participation in the 2025 Biennale of São Paulo. The Foundation invites artists who are between projects or creative phases, 
as they require time and space to develop new areas of work. Many of the artists supported by the Foundation have no 
gallery representation, so the networking and meetings with curators offered by the Foundation are extremely important for 
their careers, as is the curatorial text provided for each artist to present their work.
Given limited public support to facilitate the inward mobility of artists from the Global South, initiatives such as Fondation 
H illustrate how civil society organizations from the region have stepped in to assume a more active role in this regard, 
including by strengthening South-South mobility which will be further discussed in the chapter. 
Source: Interview with Margaux Huille, Director of Fondation H, 2 July 2025
Figure 5.3
Proportion of Parties reporting public funds supporting 
the inward and outward mobility of cultural 
professionals, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Public funds supporting the inward mobility of foreign artists
and other cultural professionals
Public funds supporting the outward mobility of national or
resident artists and other cultural professionals
93%
79%
84%
77%
52%
61%
Developed
countries
Developing
countries
Global total
Visa policies and procedures 
Measures towards visa or cross-border facilitation are 
reported by Parties to the 2005 Convention. However, there 
are some important discrepancies that could have negative 
consequences at various levels for the concerned artists and 
cultural professionals.
It is noteworthy that developed countries tend to adopt a 
more cautious approach regarding visa policies and other 
cross-border measures as a result of migration policies that 
impose high security and strict measures to prevent irregular 
immigration. For instance, Parties in Western Europe and 
North America are the least represented among all regions 
and fall far below the global average (Figure 5.2). 
In discussions of international cooperation and mobility in 
the arts and cultural sector, visa processes are often, if not 
always, identified as the first key obstacle to the circulation 
of artists and cultural professionals. These challenges 
arise not only at points of departure and arrival but also 
during transit, where visa requirements in third countries 
cause an additional administrative burden for travelling 
artists. As a result, negative consequences can be felt 
at various levels, including lost economic opportunities, 
diminished professional recognition and visibility, lack of 
access to networks and markets, and audiences deprived of 
opportunities to experience diverse cultural expressions. 
111
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
These consequences affect not only the individuals 
concerned but also the host organizations that receive 
them (festivals, residencies, conferences and training 
programmes). This aspect is illustrated by the challenges 
reported by non-governmental and international non-
governmental organizations during the fifth global 
consultation on the implementation of the UNESCO 1980 
Recommendation concerning the Status of the Artist, 
carried out in 2022-2023. For both inward and outward 
mobility, visas and immigration were identified as the most 
significant obstacles to supporting the circulation of artists 
and cultural professionals.
In this regard, one of the most striking cases of (public) 
financial loss due to visa rejections was reported by 
the national circus association in Ethiopia: 3 ‘In the 
past four years an estimated loss of US$860,000 with 
191 circus professionals not being able to travel for their 
performances, 44% of them due to visa rejections’. 
Another increasingly evident negative consequence of 
the difficult visa process and the possibility of rejection 
is its impact on the mental health of artists and cultural 
professionals themselves. As noted by Krystel Khoury, 
an independent cultural manager working in the Arab 
region and Belgium: ‘If we have never had a visa rejection 
in our lives or we never have been through the process 
of applying for a visa, we can never understand what it 
means on so many levels. Imagine the logic of rejection, 
of not being able to go somewhere. Although the planet 
belongs to everybody in a way, of course, [in practice] 
it doesn’t’ (On the Move, 2023c).
Still, Parties appear committed to devising and 
implementing policy measures to address visa-related 
challenges. Their measures can be grouped into three 
main categories:
 ¡ (Long-term) conditional visa facilitation at the point of 
arrival: For instance, New Zealand provides different 
types and durations of visas depending on sector and 
type of work in relation to incoming mobility. Other 
long-term visa regulations also exist, often based on 
specific conditions such as income level or educational 
qualifications, including the United Arab Emirates 
Golden Visa, the Passport Talent in France and the 
Creative Worker Visa in the United Kingdom. 
 ¡ Facilitation at the point of departure: Certain countries 
have introduced systems to facilitate the mobility of 
their artists and cultural professionals through official 
databases or registries. 
3. The Ethiopian National Circus is an expanding association that promotes circus art 
throughout Ethiopia. In the last four years, it has supported 7 ,750 circus artists working 
in 52 troupes across eight regions and two city administrations.
In Cameroon, artists and culture professionals’ 
mobility is progressively being managed by national 
and cultural federations. Another example of a 
registration system is used in Trinidad and Tobago, 
where individuals and organizations registered with 
the National Registry of Artists and Cultural Workers 
can use their registration certificate as part of their visa 
application to attest to their professional status.
Although supportive in spirit, such systems should 
not evolve into mechanisms of control or censorship, 
through which an official authority can decide who 
is qualified to engage in international mobility. 
This was a key point of concern made by civil 
society organizations such as Zone Franche, the 
International Music Council, AFRICALIA and Culture 
et Développement. While these systems can address 
important aspects of facilitating mobility, they can also 
place a considerable burden on developing countries 
by making their engagement a prerequisite. Several of 
the proposed measures – such as requiring ministries 
of culture in developing countries to advocate for 
artists’ visa needs or to establish national databases 
of recognized artists – risk reinforcing rather than 
alleviating structural inequalities. Assigning authorities 
the power to determine who qualifies as an artist 
introduces risks of exclusion, gatekeeping and the 
politicization of artistic recognition. 
 ¡ E-visa facilitation, a (future) in process: The 
implementation of online visa application systems 
is widely recognized as a significant step towards 
simplifying the visa process. With regards to the 
Schengen visa code and in the context of migration 
concerns and the aftermath of the COVID-19 
pandemic, a legislative proposal submitted by the 
European Commission on 27 April 2022 led to a 
decision by the Council and the European Parliament 
in June 2023 to digitize the visa procedure, as a 
way to smooth the process while improving the 
security of the Schengen space. The online platform 
is expected to be operational beginning in 2028 
(Directorate-General for Migration and Home Affairs, 
2023), though applicants will still be required to 
have an appointment at the consulate to record their 
biometric data. 
While digital platforms may simplify visa procedures, 
it is important to ensure that they do not pose a new 
source of administrative burden, increase risks related 
to personal data protection and the safety of (at-risk) 
artists, or create additional barriers for those who 
do not have the necessary digital tools and skills to 
navigate such platforms.
112
Prioritized types of mobility 
Based on analysis of the reported measures, policies, 
programmes and schemes that support inward and 
outward mobility, it can be concluded that individual 
mobility, including participation in residencies or 
international festivals, is of the greatest global interest 
(Figures 5.4 and 5.5).
Festivals and fairs, in particular, are commonly reported by 
developing countries. In Indonesia over the past four years, 
exemplary civil society initiatives that support the mobility of 
artists and cultural professionals include Solo International 
Performing Arts, the Indonesian Dance Festival, Art Jakarta, 
ARTJOG, the Lake Toba Traditional Music Festival and 
Indonesian Music Expo. These events also demonstrated 
resilience by shifting to virtual formats during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Support for international festivals and country-
focused events became particularly important after the 
pandemic. In many cases, such initiatives were carried 
out through existing bilateral agreements. For example, 
in Viet Nam, a memorandum of understanding between 
the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and the British 
Council led to the United Kingdom-Viet Nam Season 2023 
programme, which established partnerships between British 
and Vietnamese artists through projects such as ‘Cities 
in Sync’, a collaboration between the electronic music 
communities in Hanoi and Sheffield. 
Figure 5.4
Most frequently reported measures, policies, 
programmes or schemes that support inward artist 
mobility, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (1980 Recommendation)
21%
23%
22%
37%
34%
36%
26%
23%
25%
16%
20%
18%
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
Grants and subsidies for importing art works
(for instance, touring funds)
Grants and subsidies for individual mobility
(residencies, visiting international festivals, etc.)
Grants and subsidies for internationalizing artists’ careers
(co-production projects, membership in international organizations) 
Information resources and training services
Box 5.2 •  Innovative measures facilitating 
visa procedures in Africa
Several countries in Africa have implemented measures 
to facilitate visa procedures through: 
 ¡ Digital visa process for incoming mobility
In 2023, Burkina Faso introduced the E-Visa Burkina 
Faso platform, which contributed to inward mobility in 
the arts and cultural sector. It facilitated, for instance, 
7 ,866 accreditations for international artists, as well as 
the participation of 20 women professionals from the 
African film and audiovisual sector, during the 27th 
and 28th editions of the Festival panafricain du cinéma 
et de la télévision de Ouagadougou (Panafrican Film 
and Television Festival of Ouagadougou; FESPACO) in 
2021 and 2023; 150 international festivalgoers at the 
documentary film festival Koudougou Doc from 2021 
to 2023; and six foreign artists at the 13th edition 
of the International Granite Sculpture Symposium of 
Laongo in 2022. 
 ¡  Support through ministerial and intermediary 
organizations 
In Cameroon, the mobility of artists and cultural 
professionals is gradually being placed under the remit 
of national artistic and cultural federations. Financial 
support is being granted to artists taking part in events 
abroad under the Compte d’Affectation Spéciale pour 
le Soutien à la Politique Culturelle (Special Allocation 
Account for Cultural Policy Support). The Ministry of Arts 
and Culture acts as a liaison between external promoters 
and national players, offering consular facilitation (such 
as for the deliverance of passports or visas) for cultural 
professionals taking part in external events. 
 ¡ Bilateral agreements 
Since 2021 , a review of the agreement between the 
European Union and the Republic of Cabo Verde on 
the facilitation of issuance of short-stay visas (2021) 
has led to new provisions that significantly facilitate 
the mobility of Cabo Verdeans within the territory of 
the European Union. These include the reduction of 
fees for processing visa applications; the expansion 
of categories of people benefiting from multiple-
entry visas; the simplification of procedures and 
documentation to be presented; and the creation of 
a mechanism that determines the duration of validity 
of multiple-entry visas.
Source: Burkina Faso QPR, 2024; Cabo Verde QPR, 2024; Cameroon QPR, 2024
113
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
Figure 5.5
Most frequently reported types of grants and subsidies 
that support outward artist mobility, by developing and 
developed countries
Source: UNESCO (1980 Recommendation)
Data from On the Move’s Cultural Mobility Yearbook 2025 
confirm that mobility opportunities supporting exclusively 
individuals (as opposed to collectives, groups or companies) 
are the most prevalent across all regions. Residencies and 
artistic disciplines represent the most common formats, 
accounting for 49.3% of the calls analysed throughout the 
year 2024. Additionally, the data highlight that, compared 
to other purposes related to inward and outward mobility, 
training and capacity-building activities (such as acquiring 
new artistic skills or enhancing management abilities) stand 
out as the only category that exhibits higher levels of inward 
mobility. By contrast, travel grants, residencies and cultural 
exchange programmes are more prominent in terms of 
outward mobility support. 
Finally, information resources and training services emerge 
as the least common types of mobility support. This 
may help explain the high involvement of civil society 
organizations in these areas.
29%
30%
29%
38%
42%
40%
33%
28%
31%
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
Grants and subsidies for exporting art works
(for instance, touring funds)
Grants and subsidies for individual mobility
(residencies, visiting international festivals, etc.)
Grants and subsidies for internationalizing artists’ careers
(co-production projects, membership in international organizations,
etc.) 
The consistent but challenged role of 
civil society organizations
The role of associations, networks and formal or 
informal organizations continues to be key in the 
international cultural mobility landscape with regards 
to the following areas:
a.  Access to administrative information 
and related advocacy action
There is ongoing support and advocacy from 
independent organizations that provide guidance to 
the sector on visa procedures and other administrative 
issues. Pearle*, the European network of employers 
in the performing arts sector, has published a guide 
entitled Visas for Third Country National Artists 
Travelling to the Schengen Area (2020), complemented 
by a new publication addressing the complex patchwork 
of immigration rules across European Union countries. 
Similarly, the network Zone Franche commissioned 
the French Mobility Information Point MobiCulture to 
update a guide detailing the various steps involved in 
visa applications (Lukacs, 2022). 
Zone Franche also coordinates the Comité Visas 
Artistes (Artists Visas Committee) in France, which, 
since 2009, has been a unique example of a sector-
based entity connected with various ministries (Culture, 
Home Affairs, and Foreign and European Affairs). The 
committee helps to tackle visa-related obstacles through 
advocacy actions, such as issuing statements that 
identify obstacles to mobility. For example, statements 
were issued in October 2023 regarding Burkina Faso, 
Mali and Niger, and in April 2024 regarding the State 
of Palestine. 
A more recent civil society initiative to raise awareness 
of the specificities of visa procedures for artists is 
The Lexicon on the International Mobility of Artists 
and Culture Professionals (Kheriji-Watts, 2024). This 
document provides targeted training to ministerial and 
consular staff in Schengen countries. Conceived by 
On the Move with Pearle*, AFRICALIA, MobiCulture 
and the support of the French Ministry of Culture, the 
lexicon is a direct outcome of recommendations from 
the sector calling for greater awareness among visa-
issuing authorities of the specific working conditions of 
artists and cultural professionals. 
The role of Mobility Information Points has also been 
strengthened through a more visible and unified web 
platform that includes practical resources and activities.
114
Box 5.3 •  Mobility Information Points
Mobility Information Points are organizations 
whose main mission is to provide information on 
administrative matters relating to cultural mobility, 
such as visas, customs, and taxation and social 
protection. They provide free, reliable and adapted 
information to artists and cultural professionals 
through direct contact via online video and phone 
calls, email and training sessions. 
Mobility Information Points are often cited as a 
good practice for providing tailored and accessible 
information to address the administrative complexities 
of cultural mobility. Their importance was highlighted 
in the 2022 edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for 
Creativity report and in the European Parliament 
resolution of 21 November 2023, which made 
recommendations to the Commission regarding 
a European Union framework for the social and 
professional situation of artists and workers in the 
cultural and creative sectors (European Parliament).
Since 2022, the number of Mobility Information Points 
has increased by two, with new members in Austria 
and Sweden, bringing the total to 1 1 . The network also 
includes points in Belgium, Czechia, France, Germany, 
the Netherlands (Kingdom of), Portugal, Slovenia, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States of America.
All Mobility Information Points are publicly funded, 
as relevant Quadrennial Periodic Reports attest. They 
differ in terms of structure: some are standalone 
organizations (such as an association), while others 
are part of an existing institution. In Germany, for 
example, they are the result of a merger between three 
organizations’ services.
Mobility Information Points are part of the On the 
Move network, which facilitates joint training sessions, 
knowledge transfer and advocacy actions, while also 
encouraging the establishment of new information 
points around the world.
Mobility Information Points are in demand, with an 
average of 42 free consultations occurring per week 
for the nine information points analysed in 2024. 
Guidance regarding visas, residence and work permits 
is the top request in the consultations provided 
(35.5%) (On the Move, 2025d).
Source: European Parliament; On the Move, 2025d
b. More agile support to cross-sectoral mobility 
Independent organizations have also adapted their 
mobility support based on the needs of their targeted 
beneficiaries. Examples include Ettijahat – Independent 
Culture and the Mekong Cultural Hub, which focuses on 
curated forms of mobility connected to cross-sectoral topics 
(such as diversity, climate crisis, etc.). However, particularly 
since the onset of the pandemic, the funding and support 
that some independent schemes provide have slowly been 
phased out, as has been the case with the independent 
mobility fund Art Moves Africa. This has not only limited 
funding opportunities but has also reduced networking 
opportunities and data analysis on cultural mobility trends 
on the African continent.
Box 5.4 •  Ettijahat – Independent Culture: 
supporting displaced Syrian artists
Active since 201 1 , Ettijahat has been vital in supporting 
and promoting Syrian artists in Syria and around the world. 
The organization has undergone successive revisions to 
its programmes to ensure responsiveness to political and 
economic upheavals, as well as to the cultural changes and 
developments over the last 14 years. In 2024, Ettijahat 
launched a three-year programme entitled ‘Zad: Miles 
for Connection’, designed to support ‘a generation of 
artists who were forced to relocate to Europe, mainly from 
the Levant and from conflict-affected countries from the 
Arab Region’. The main aim is to facilitate the visibility 
of displaced artists within their country of residence and 
more widely throughout Europe. Through Zad, individual 
artists as well as collectives are supported financially to 
showcase their works. The support covers costs for travel, 
accommodation and daily expenses (including for children), 
shipping costs for artworks and production materials, and 
translation services for artworks and live events. In the 
beginning of 2025, Ettijahat announced the results of the 
programme’s first round. Nine art projects were supported, 
five of them for individuals and four for collectives.
In its final statement, the selection committee stressed the 
importance for artists to continue exploring new avenues 
for building artistic and intellectual relationships that 
broaden their horizons in Europe. As displaced artists 
may face challenges in their relocation and precarity that 
can result in their professional isolation, it is essential to 
provide them with genuine opportunities for networking 
and engagement with the artistic communities around 
them. This also opens a path for them to create critical 
and innovative artistic influences that could contribute to 
enriching the European cultural landscape.
115
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
c. Information sharing, training and networking
Several information platforms remain highly active thanks 
to the support of public funding bodies. These include 
TransArtists, a website dedicated to residency opportunities 
supported by DutchCulture, and Culture360, a platform of 
the Asia-Europe Foundation (2017) that regularly updates 
cultural mobility funding guides for Asian countries. Beyond 
this access to information, independent platforms like 
Culture Funding Watch develop capacity-building sessions 
and workshops to better equip the sector to apply for 
funding, particularly in the South-West Asian and North 
African regions and on the African continent. Finally, cultural 
networks are also developing possibilities for international 
mobility support. One example is the International Network 
for Contemporary Performing Arts and its Global Connect 
Programme, supported by the European Union.
The following section will particularly address this question 
in connection with the shifting borders of cultural mobility 
and the growing need for stronger connections between 
Parties and civil society organizations. 
BETWEEN CROSSPOINTS AND 
CHECKPOINTS: THE (SHIFTING?) 
BORDERS OF MOBILITY
This section critically examines the key conceptual 
and practical fields that shape contemporary mobility, 
encompassing measures, policies and operational practices, 
not only in international mobility but also within the 
broader cultural and artistic ecosystems, which both enable 
and constrain movement. The Quadrennial Periodic Reports 
serve as an essential foundation for this analysis, offering a 
vast qualitative data source through their narrative insights. 
By examining these reports and key secondary sources, 
one can gain a deeper understanding of how Parties and 
other actors respond to global shifts across multiple levels, 
ultimately redefining the landscape of cultural mobility. This 
allows us to consider how these shifting borders of mobility 
could be better addressed and managed. 
For the purposes of this section, the following updated 
definition of cultural mobility proposed by On the Move in 
2019 has been considered: ‘Mobility is a central component of 
the professional trajectory of artists and culture professionals. 
Involving a temporary cross-border movement, often for 
educational, capacity-building, networking, or working 
purposes, it may have tangible or intangible outputs in 
the short term, and/or be part of a long-term professional 
development process. Mobility is a conscious process, and 
those involved in it, whether by directly engaging in it or 
by supporting it, should take into consideration its cultural, 
social, political, environmental, ethical and economic 
implications’ (Baltà Portolés et al., 2019).
This definition attempts to encapsulate the various 
stakeholders and dynamics at play in shaping and 
supporting cultural mobility. While it takes these various 
dimensions into account, certain key areas remain 
insufficiently visible and are inadequately addressed in 
existing policy responses, as the following sections will show.
Freedom of movement, mobility and displacement
Mobility of artists and cultural professionals refers to 
temporary and voluntary cross-border movement to 
participate in residencies, exhibitions, festivals, touring for 
performances and concerts, exchanges and other forms of 
collaboration. In this understanding, cultural mobility does 
not generally encompass situations of forced displacement 
or asylum seeking. While mobility and forced displacement 
of at-risk artists are two distinct issues, they intersect 
through certain shared policy aspects, infrastructures and 
measures. They can also face interconnected challenges 
including issues of access, global inequity and the need 
for more inclusive policies. The Conclusions of the Council 
of the European Union on at-risk and displaced artists on 
16 May 2023, are in this regard a political milestone as 
they invite European Union Member States to ‘consider 
adapting, where appropriate, regular artistic residencies 
into emergency residencies, taking into account the needs 
of at-risk and displaced artists, including those emerging 
from Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine’ (Council 
of the European Union, 2023b).
Between 2021 and 2024, multiple Parties reported 
initiatives relating to at-risk artists and cultural 
professionals. Examples include programmes or initiatives 
specifically targeting Ukrainian artists, such as the Office 
Ukraine in Austria programme, measures protecting 
Ukrainian artists at risk or in exile in Poland, and support 
provided in Finland in 2023 when the Ministry of 
Education and Culture allocated over half a million euros 
to 21 Finnish cultural communities for cultural cooperation 
with Ukrainians. Other programmes are not specifically 
focused on one country, such as PAUSE and l’Atelier des 
artistes en exil (the Artists in Exile Workshop) in France and 
the Shifting Places programme in Switzerland.
It is important to underline that in contexts of war, 
conflict and political instability, discourses around 
mobility often shift from being associated with freedom 
of movement to being framed in terms of relocation, a 
concept more closely tied to human rights frameworks. 
This shift reflects not only changes in the working 
conditions of artists in countries and regions affected by 
conflict and political or humanitarian instability, but also 
a broader shift in the global system’s relationship with 
artists from these areas.
116
The implications of this shift, particularly in relation to 
human rights frameworks and the support systems needed 
to protect artists and cultural professionals in emergency 
contexts, are explored further in Chapter 10 of this report. 
Although rare, some initiatives illustrate approaches 
to mobility opportunities for displaced artists that 
prioritize long-term artistic development and professional 
integration, rather than addressing their situation solely 
through a humanitarian lens. In addition to the Zad: 
Miles of Connection programme mentioned previously, 
there is also Rawabet, an open call for performing 
artists-in-residence organized by MASAHAT and Ettijahat 
(Transversal Project, 2025). Both organizations were 
founded and are led by Arab artists and cultural 
professionals, and both operate from exile. The open call 
addresses performing artists from the Arab States region 
who arrived in European territories after 2015, inviting 
them to, according to the announcement text, ‘develop 
and create works in collaboration with European and non-
European counterparts and audiences, in order to create 
a more diverse cultural scene and combat stereotypes 
and discrimination’.
South-South mobility
Specific facts and figures on South-South mobility are not 
always readily available; however, it is noteworthy that 
among the Parties to the 2005 Convention, developing 
countries are more likely than developed countries to report 
public funds specifically supporting the mobility of artists 
from other developing countries, including through North-
South-South and South-South cooperation (Figure 5.6). 
Figure 5.6
Proportion of Parties reporting public funds specifically 
supporting the mobility of artists and other cultural 
professionals from or between developing countries, 
including North-South-South and South-South 
cooperation, by developing and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
43%
56%
51%
South-South mobility programmes are being implemented 
or tested by Parties through approaches including:
 ¡ Building on experience and partnerships, as illustrated 
by the Ibero-American cultural cooperation programmes 
(Iberescena, Ibermúsicas, etc.) and the Transcultura 
programme.4 
 ¡ Signing bilateral or multilateral agreements that may 
pave the way for more exchange and mobility support. 
For example, Colombia adopted a strategy focusing on 
Africa, which involved the signing of memorandums 
of understanding to strengthen cultural, political, 
social, economic and commercial relations with several 
countries, including Ghana, Kenya and South Africa. 
Such cultural diplomacy efforts can result in tangible 
outcomes. In 2023, the Colombian delegation 
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the 
Maloba International Festival of Theatre, Dance and 
Circus, a cultural exchange event that supported the 
participation of the Afro-Colombian artistic dance 
group Sankofa Danzafro. The visit was organized by 
Colombia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Pan-
African Council (Pan -African Council, 2023).
Some recent programmes, coordinated either by 
governments through external funds or by civil society 
organizations, address lack of funding, (gender) 
representation and regional connectivity:
 ¡ In 2023, the Indian Ocean Commission, with support 
from the French Development Agency, launched the 
AléVini mobility fund as part of a larger programme 
focused on cultural and creative industries. AléVini 
connects the arts and cultural sectors of Comoros, 
La Réunion (France), Madagascar, Mauritius, 
Mozambique and Seychelles. Running until 2026, the 
programme places special emphasis on mobility for 
women artists. It strengthens regional collaboration 
and contributes to local economic development by 
supporting cultural ecosystems and promoting inter-
island artistic exchange. Programme managers report 
that 48% of beneficiaries in the first two cohorts 
were women – a significant achievement that could 
encourage further participation from this group 
(Baltà Portolés, 2024).
4. ‘Transcultura: Integrating Cuba, the Caribbean and the European Union through 
Culture and Creativity’ is a UNESCO regional cooperation programme implemented 
between 2020 and 2025 in 17 Caribbean states, with funding from the European 
Union. The programme fostered cultural mobility and exchange among young 
cultural professionals within the Caribbean region, and also between the Caribbean 
and Europe.
117
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
 ¡ Certain programmes dedicated to South-South 
mobility also experiment with new forms of mobility. 
The South-South Arts Fellowship by Living Arts 
International, connecting cultural sectors across Africa 
and Asia, advocates for flexible models: open-ended 
travel grants, process-based approaches, informal 
exchanges, support for creative professionals (not 
only artists) and ‘curated mobilities’ – programmes 
designed to approach mobility as a thoughtful, 
relational process that reflects on how guests and hosts 
relate to one another and how participants engage 
with cultural differences. These ideas resonate with 
Orbitals, a curated mobility programme by Mophradat, 
which brings together four curators or arts researchers 
from or based in the Arab world. They travel to 
international locations in the Global South to explore 
new artistic contexts and share their learning with their 
communities. Past editions took place in Mexico City 
(2018), Delhi and Chandigarh (2019), São Paulo and 
Rio de Janeiro (2022), and Dakar (2023).
Beyond these initiatives, South-South mobility continues 
to face challenges at multiple levels: 
 ¡ Key funding schemes have been discontinued or 
paused, particularly those initiated by civil society 
organizations, such as Art Moves Africa, the Ticket 
Box 5.5 •  Bangkok International Performing Arts Meeting
The Bangkok International Performing Arts Meeting (BIPAM) is a platform and industry gathering dedicated to the 
performing arts in South-East Asia, organized by and for grassroots practitioners.
It is important to note that most South-East Asian countries operate within ecosystems and working conditions that differ 
from those in the Global North; that is, they are often characterized by limited or non-existent arts infrastructure and 
persistent political instability. 
The 2025 edition of BIPAM recorded a significant increase in attendance from South-East Asia, as well as from many 
other countries and regions that had not attended previous editions. This reflects the meeting’s role as an international 
gathering place with a strong focus on South-East Asian performing arts.
BIPAM typically relies on project-based funding from arts and cultural organizations in Thailand. In addition to core 
partners like the Ministry of Culture and the Office of Contemporary Arts and Culture, it also seeks funds from other 
government bodies that understand and support its mission, such as the Thailand Convention and Exhibition Bureau. 
The organization seeks further support from international cultural institutes (such as the Japan Foundation) and, 
on occasion, from corporate partners with an interest in contemporary arts.
In relation to key policy recommendations, one of the biggest barriers holding back BIPAM from advancing a policy 
benefiting the sector is the limited recognition of the arts at the national level as a means of improving citizens’ 
livelihoods beyond economic considerations. This has led to certain commercialized artforms being prioritized over 
others. To increase South-South mobility and diplomacy, BIPAM considers that organizations should serve as their own 
benchmarks and reference points, rather than relying on measures from the Global North. 
Source: Interview with Sasapin Siriwanij, Artistic Director of BIPAM, 6 July 2025
Fund of the Prince Claus Fund, which covers artists’ 
travel costs, and the Mobility First! programme of the 
Asia-Europe Foundation, which supported connections 
among artists across Asian countries. 
 ¡ Some mobility funding schemes focusing on South-
South mobility are facing budget limitations, due to 
the high level of demands. For example, the recently 
established Caribbean Cultural Fund received 470 
applications in its first round but was only able to 
award 16 grants (Franco, 2024). Many such initiatives 
have been affected by the impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic and resulting reductions in funding.
 ¡ Multilayered structural barriers continue to impede 
South-South mobility, including insufficient regional 
connectivity, the high cost of flights and visa-related 
challenges, for instance those faced by nationals of 
Indian Ocean islands. Airfares between neighbouring 
countries are sometimes disproportionately high; for 
example, Caribbean countries face some of the highest 
ticket prices in the world (Arnell, 2024). 
Finally, there is insufficient support for South-South 
mobility related to contemporary art practices, and 
particularly those devised by grassroot initiatives, as 
attested by the example of the Bangkok International 
Performing Arts Meeting (Box 5.5).
118
Box 5.6 •  Caribbean Culture Fund 
This project pilots the establishment of a fund that supports the arts of the Caribbean, fostering inclusion, innovation and 
sustainability. The fund is incubated by Le centre d’art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti, with funding from Open Society Foundations and 
the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. The fund addresses specific barriers identified in the Caribbean region, including the need 
for a better understanding of the funding landscape and available collaboration grants, as well as the development of grant-
writing skills. It seeks to raise awareness of existing grant opportunities and to support applicants in securing funding.
The second round of calls included collaboration grants within the region, allocating US$250,000 from a total funding 
envelope of US$400,000. The funded projects explore various topics, including environmental and cultural themes, carnival, 
performance and traditional arts, as well as themes of gender, diversity, identity, migration, belonging and connection.
‘The synergies between the projects motivate us to create more opportunities for Caribbean creatives to come together and 
collaborate’, says Kellie Magnus, Executive Director. ‘We’re looking forward to continuing to fund more opportunities for 
collaboration as well as the residences and fellowships that we’ll be supporting in Call 3.’
Source: Caribbean Culture Fund, 2025
Carbon footprint and green travels: 
a new hindrance to cultural mobility? 
Issues related to cross-border mobility are also linked to 
unequal access to resources resulting from geographical 
circumstances and limited connectivity, including the lack 
of transportation infrastructure. This matter has come under 
increased scrutiny, particularly since the onset of the COVID-19 
pandemic, as the lack of context-specific approaches to 
sustainable mobility could exacerbate existing disparities.
As highlighted in the final publication of the first phase of the 
European Union-funded programme Halaqat, which explored 
the relation between Europe and the Arab world, ‘While 
participants recognise the devastating effects of air travels 
on the environment, they are concerned that their carbon 
footprint will be used as an excuse to put more hindrances on 
their already challenged international mobility’ (Bozar and 
Goethe-Institut, 2022).
Particularly since the pandemic, and even though numerous 
projects addressing the issue have already been developed, 
the arts and cultural sector has become increasingly 
engaged in acting more responsibly regarding climate 
change issues. However, in more privileged contexts, this 
engagement often focuses narrowly on the carbon footprint 
of transportation, without adequately considering the 
specific working contexts and the essential need for mobility 
and international connections of many artists. Though 
climate change and environmental sustainability are key 
topics that arose in calls for cultural mobility, few have 
translated these priorities into concrete changes in funding 
frameworks. As noted, ‘13.8% of calls launched in 2024 
were labelled as relating thematically to environment and 
sustainability, although additional financial support for 
green forms of travel remain rare’ (On the Move, 2025a).
One of the only exceptions since 2023 is the European 
Union’s Culture Moves Europe programme that provides 
a ‘green top up’ or higher financial support for artists 
and cultural professionals who use sustainable means of 
transportation for their mobility.
It seems therefore necessary to ensure that climate action 
in the arts does not inadvertently reinforce existing 
inequalities. A holistic approach, aligned with the concept 
of climate justice as defined by UNESCO, must be taken 
into consideration: one that addresses the underlying social, 
political and economic drivers of the climate crisis, ensures a 
fair allocation of the burdens and impacts of climate change 
and seeks to amend historical inequities (UNESCO, 2024). 
The hybridity of formats and the (non)choice 
of digital mobility options 
Similarly to the question of environmental sustainability, 
the digital question brings its own set of contradictions if 
not contextualized. The COVID-19 pandemic brought global 
mobility to a halt for the first time in decades, creating a 
significant disruption. As a result, mobility was reconsidered, 
not only in the wake of the pandemic but also as a response 
to the ecological crisis and rapid technological development.
While online was the most common format for meetings 
in 2021 (On the Move, 2022), in-person mobility 
opportunities have since regained prominence and now 
represent the majority. In 2024, more than 80% of the 
643 analysed paid mobility opportunities were conducted 
exclusively in person, more than 14% combined physical 
and online participation (compared to 10.5% in 2023), 
and only 4.3% were exclusively online (compared with 
29.4% in 2021) (On the Move, 2025a).
119
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
A common format is to combine a longer online or remote 
working period with a shorter and more intense schedule 
of in-person activities. Funds such as Concerts SA in South 
Africa provide an interesting model of hybridity; the 
group encourages international cooperation while still 
supporting live music through its Digital Mobility Fund, 
created in 2020 during the pandemic.
Hybrid formats also reflect a growing willingness to 
test new forms of international collaboration. One 
example is the Four Nations International Fund set up 
in 2021 by Arts Council England, the Arts Council of 
Northern Ireland, the Arts Council of Wales and Wales 
Arts International, and Creative Scotland. Covering 
an average of 25 eligible countries per year, the fund 
supports projects with an international dimension, 
including in-person, digital and hybrid activities such 
as ‘exchanges, residencies, partnership development, 
co-creation and networking, with priority given to 
applications experimenting with innovative models of 
international collaboration’. 
If hybrid formats can be seen as a way of overcoming 
challenges of access (including for people with visa 
issues or disability restrictions) and as a way of limiting 
environmental impact, they should be, however, 
regarded as a complementary option, not as a new 
model imposed for budgetary reasons. 
The shift towards digital engagement, while offering 
certain advantages, can also exacerbate existing 
disparities by reducing opportunities for artists from 
developing countries to present their work in person, 
to connect to new audiences and to develop potential 
future partnerships. If digital formats become the norm, 
it may limit their access to international markets, hinder 
career development and undermine the fair circulation 
of diverse cultural expressions. In effect, digital 
substitution risks creating a parallel (online) world 
accessible primarily to those with sufficient technical 
infrastructure and capacity, contradicting the 2005 
Convention’s aim of promoting equitable access and a 
balanced flow of cultural goods and services.
Depending on the context, these dynamics can create 
additional impediments to international cultural 
mobility and have an impact on the well-being and 
mental health of artists and cultural professionals. It 
is essential to address these stress factors in relation 
to the types of obstacles faced (such as visas, lack of 
funding, or parenting responsibilities) and in connection 
with the concerned communities of artists and 
cultural professionals (including at-risk and relocated 
artists, artists with disabilities, LGBTIQ+ artists and 
Indigenous artists).
Towards improved integration of societal 
and transversal issues
The 2005 Convention’s Monitoring Framework and the 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports do not directly address topics 
that illustrate wider cultural dynamics and intersectoral 
approaches to cultural mobility, such as those related to 
well-being and mental health discussed in the previous 
section. Although limited in number, some of the initiatives 
identified in the periodic reports describe efforts to adapt 
to the evolving realities and challenges faced by artists and 
cultural professionals, particularly with regard to societal, 
environmental and personal issues. 
For instance, the Cultural Exchange Programme of the 
Ministry of Culture in Brazil can be highlighted as a 
cross-sectoral approach to supporting mobility. Launched 
in 2023, its aim is to promote cultural exchange and 
activities that link cultural production with broader 
societal themes including health, human rights, science, 
technology, environment, racial equality, social inclusion, 
territories and work, among others. 
Another example comes from Chile, where an annual 
call for arts projects to be presented abroad, managed 
by the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs since 2023, 
is one of the main instruments for advancing the 
internationalization of cultural and artistic practices. For 
the 2024 open call, new milestones were incorporated, 
including awarding five extra points to projects promoting 
the internationalization of Chilean artists that address 
gender and environmental themes, to serve as a tie breaker 
among proposals with equal scores. Regarding gender and 
parenting issues, a relevant initiative is that of the Swiss 
foundation Pro Helvetia (Box 5.7). 
Box 5.7 • Targeted support for artist-parents
The Swiss Arts Council Pro Helvetia offers targeted 
support for artist-parents in research or residency periods. 
Artists with children under the age of 18 who participate 
in residencies or research trips organized by the Arts 
Council may apply for additional financial support of 
up to US$1 ,107 per month of travel. This contribution 
can help finance expenses such as childcare either at 
the destination or at home, travel costs for children and 
a caregiver, and extra accommodation costs related to 
family needs. In 2022, 45 artists with children benefited 
from this measure. Feedback has been generally positive, 
with artists valuing the flexibility of financial support 
adapted to the specific needs of each family. 
Source: Switzerland QPR, 2024
120
The mobility of artists and cultural professionals with 
disabilities was not addressed directly in the Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports, but some initiatives can be highlighted, such 
as the hybrid ‘2x2 Residency creative exchange for disabled 
artists’ in China and the United Kingdom, a pilot initiative 
of the British Council China. It is also worth highlighting the 
‘Europe Beyond Access’ project, which is co-funded by the 
European Union and works to provide tailor-made support as 
well as professional recognition for disabled performing artists 
and cultural professionals in Europe.
Regional disparities within a country, such as between urban 
and rural areas or between capital cities and peripheral 
regions, can create internal barriers to mobility for artists or 
cultural professionals within their country. These disparities 
often stem from unequal access to cultural infrastructure and 
to artistic opportunities outside major urban centres. In some 
contexts, in-border mobility serves as an essential pathway 
for artists to access international platforms, especially in 
geographically dispersed island nations. As such, in-border 
mobility merits further policy attention as a complementary 
measure to international mobility frameworks, rather than as 
a substitute. When understood as paving the way towards 
international mobility, in-border mobility can be a powerful 
mechanism for addressing power imbalances and ensuring 
greater diversity in terms of ethnicity, language, political and 
cultural realities, aesthetics, and access to networks, resources 
and platforms in the international mobility ecosystem.
In exploring the shifting borders of mobility, this section 
proposes an approach to understanding the evolving global 
characteristics of mobility that accounts for regional and 
contextual conditions. Reconsidering approaches to mobility 
in the context of global crises, while avoiding exacerbating 
inequalities, is essential. In this regard, this section has 
sought to illustrate the growing emphasis on ethical 
and sustainable mobility, questioning who moves, under 
what conditions, for which reasons, and whose voices are 
amplified in these transnational cultural exchanges. These 
perspectives highlight mobility not just as a means of artistic 
circulation, but also as a framework for solidarity and critical 
engagement with power structures within the arts.
CONCLUSION
This chapter aimed to demonstrate that the borders of cultural 
mobility have shifted in terms of their objectives, patterns and 
formats. It unpacked current trends with regards to inward 
and outward mobility, remaining and growing challenges 
particularly on visas, as well as the consistent role of civil society 
organizations to tackle inequalities of access. It also attempted 
to endorse the unending transformation of the sector through 
balancing a global understanding with local contextualization 
while adopting a multi-faceted approach to address questions 
related to forced displacement in the arts and cultural sector; 
South-South, regional and in-border mobility; environmental 
sustainability; digital mobility; and the connections of these 
dimensions to mental health and well-being. If cultural mobility 
is to remain part of the professional trajectory of artists and 
cultural professionals, it must also reflect the multifaceted 
motivations and needs in an era of polycrisis, where wars, 
conflicts and political instability are increasingly shaping the 
world. If cultural mobility is to address inequalities in terms 
of access to funding, resources and contexts, and avoid 
exacerbating existing barriers, such considerations must be 
placed at the centre of policy and organizational narratives.
Cultural mobility has ultimately been reshaped by shifts in the 
professional and conceptual understanding of what artistic 
and cultural mobility entails. Over the past two decades 
and particularly since the COVID-19 pandemic, mobility has 
evolved from being seen primarily as the physical movement 
of artists and cultural professionals across borders to a more 
complex and multidimensional practice and professional 
trajectory. Today, mobility is increasingly understood as a 
process of knowledge exchange, co-creation, and network 
building that extends beyond geographical movement.
Based on this definition, it is recommended that these 
efforts should also align with the principles of the 2005 
Convention, particularly the commitment to equitable 
access, diversity of cultural expressions and preferential 
treatment for artists and cultural professionals from 
developing countries. Recommendations have therefore been 
shaped to respond to these multiple dimensions of cultural 
mobility patterns, objectives and related needs. 
Proposal for an updated definition of cultural mobility
‘Cultural mobility is a central part of the professional 
development of artists and cultural professionals of all 
genders, abilities, socio-political contexts and professional 
experiences. This involves temporary cross-border movement 
for educational, capacity-building, networking or working 
purposes, which can be supported online and/or in person. 
Cultural mobility can be also understood as a must for 
artists and cultural professionals due to reasons such as 
war, politics, the economy or environmental issues in their 
country of residence. 
To answer these multifaceted approaches to mobility, those 
involved in supporting it, including public and private funding 
bodies, policy makers and independent organizations, should 
be more aware of these different situations in order to adapt 
funding schemes and support mechanisms for mobility. This 
would ensure that recurring issues such as administrative 
and funding problems, as well as more recent considerations 
such as environmental and digital issues, forced mobilities 
and mental health issues, are taken into account and seen 
as opportunities to reinvent fairer cultural mobility patterns, 
based on values such as care, hospitality and solidarity’.
121
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility 
 ¡ Reinforce South-South mobility flows through adapted and 
consistent mechanisms, including exchange frameworks, 
funding opportunities and context-specific artistic platforms 
that account for geographical, transport-related, economic 
and cultural conditions in a comprehensive manner. 
 ¡ Systematically integrate environmental sustainability, 
digital transformation, mental health and accessibility 
(including for artists with disabilities, at-risk artists and 
other vulnerable groups) in operational programmes 
supporting the mobility of artists and cultural 
professionals, particularly from developing countries. 
These dimensions should be embedded throughout 
the design, implementation and evaluation of 
mobility funds. 
 ¡ Address the burdens faced by artists and cultural 
professionals, particularly those with different abilities, 
those who are at-risk or displaced, artist-parents, 
and members of less visible communities, including 
Indigenous artists.
For civil society organizations
 ¡ Proactively participate in policy discussions and 
negotiations with policy makers and funders at all levels 
of governance (international, national, regional and local).
 ¡ Strive to raise the visibility of initiatives that could be 
replicated or scaled up with additional funding at the 
national or cross-border level, including independent 
mobility funding schemes and organizations providing 
information on administrative matters, such as Mobility 
Information Points.
 ¡ Be involved in implementing the recommendations 
of the Intergovernmental Reflection Group on the 
implementation of Article 16 on ‘Preferential treatment 
for developing countries’. Their involvement is particularly 
important for improving access to information on funding 
and administrative procedures, as well as in addressing 
ethical considerations related to the movement of people 
from developing to developed countries.
For intergovernmental organizations, 
including UNESCO 
 ¡ Update the UNESCO monitoring mechanisms, including 
the Monitoring Framework and the Quadrennial Periodic 
Reporting of the 2005 Convention, with indicators that 
capture the evolving complexities of cultural mobility. 
This would enable more targeted data collection on 
mobility flows, policies and programmes adapted to 
specific contexts that address the needs of artists, 
including those related to green and digital mobilities, 
gender equality, accessibility and emergency situations. 
There is a need for a shift in policy thinking and action to 
improve cultural mobility at multiple levels. This will require 
collectively reimagining cultural mobility practices, while 
addressing gaps in access as well as the paradoxes and 
complexities that characterize today’s rapidly evolving cultural 
mobility patterns.
For Parties to the Convention
 ¡ Particularly those from developed countries, provide 
equal support for inward and outward mobility schemes 
in line with Article 16 on ’Preferential treatment for 
developing countries‘, ensuring that all programmes are 
based on transparent and open application guidelines.
 ¡ Particularly those from developed countries, facilitate 
access to their markets and mobility opportunities, 
especially by simplifying the visa process for short or 
temporary stays. Greater complementarity of actions 
between ministries of culture, interior affairs and 
foreign affairs should be encouraged.
 ¡ Engage more proactively in facilitating the visa 
process, while avoiding creating new constraints, 
such as restrictive definitions or lists of ‘official’ 
artists, that, even if intended to ease mobility, risk 
becoming tools of exclusion or censorship. At the 
same time, efforts should be strengthened to 
support temporary cross-border mobility through 
simplified and transparent procedures at points 
of departure, arrival and transit. 
 ¡ Ensure the inclusion of civil society organizations 
in discussions and negotiations related to mobility, 
alongside public and private sector actors. This enables 
the development of cross-sectoral solutions that build 
on existing, proven support models (for example, 
independent mobility schemes) and information 
resources (for example, websites, guides and training 
toolkits) rather than creating new, potentially 
duplicative initiatives.
 ¡ Support civil society initiatives that facilitate 
access to information on cultural mobility (such as 
funding opportunities and administrative guidance) 
in synergy with international organizations, 
including UNESCO.
 ¡ Give greater consideration to the needs of at-risk and 
displaced artists and cultural professionals, both in 
emergency contexts and in relation to their long-term 
professional inclusion when relocated.
 ¡ Promote in-border and regional mobility to strengthen 
local and regional networks, as a complement to, and 
not a replacement for, cross-border mobility.
RECOMMENDATIONS
© Isidro Ferrer Soria/Photographers: Hugo Ferrer y Vega Mayor*
123
Chapter 6
Tracking cultural 
goods and services 
in global trade
André Gouws and Jen Snowball
© Isidro Ferrer Soria/Photographers: Hugo Ferrer y Vega Mayor*
124
 ¡ A greater share of Parties to the Convention report 
implementing export strategies or measures to support 
trade in cultural goods and services. This trend reflects 
increasing recognition of the creative economy as a 
driver of growth and development. For instance, 72% 
of the Parties reported export strategies related to 
the visual arts in 2021-2024, up from 48% in the 
previous period. 
 ¡ Product development, Intellectual Property and 
branding represent the highest value-added stages of 
the value chain and offer strategic opportunities for 
capacity building and innovation. 
 ¡ Between 2006 and 2022, US$648 billion was 
allocated globally to Aid for Trade, yet only a small 
share of this funding targeted cultural and creative 
industries. While some countries have reported culture-
focused Aid for Trade initiatives and included cultural 
exports in their national economic development 
strategies, Aid for Trade remains an underutilized tool 
for promoting a more balanced flow of cultural goods 
and services.
 ¡ Since 2005, global trade in cultural goods has 
grown significantly, doubling in value to reach 
US$254.28 billion in 2023.
 ¡ Developing countries are increasing their share 
of cultural goods exports at a much faster pace 
than developed countries, growing at an average 
annual rate of 8.5% compared to 1 .8% in developed 
countries. While China (19%) and India (6%) remain 
dominant, a wider group of developing economies 
are contributing to this growth.
 ¡ Upper-middle-income developing countries have 
increased their cultural goods exports and diversified 
their trade with both developed and developing 
partners. This has contributed to the geographical 
diversification of cultural goods trade and helped 
reduce the share of cultural trade occurring solely 
between developed countries from 2007 to 2023. 
By contrast, Least Developed Countries still represent 
only a very small share of global cultural goods trade.
 ¡ Global trade in cultural services has become 
increasingly significant in the post-COVID era, as many 
cultural goods dematerialize and move to digital 
formats. While developed countries still dominate the 
market, developing countries have strengthened their 
position, rising from 12% in 2010 to 20% in 2023.
 ¡ Developing countries are increasingly investing in 
e-commerce platforms and digital tools to promote 
their cultural goods and services, enhancing visibility, 
export potential and international reach.
KEY FINDINGS
125
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
US$118 billion ➞ US$254 billion
Global trade in cultural goods has 
doubled since the Convention’s adoption
46%
of global cultural goods exports 
originate in developing countries
Only 20%
of global trade 
in cultural 
services is held 
by developing 
countries
Out of US$648 billion
allocated globally to 
Aid for Trade, only 
a small share targeted 
cultural industries
Only 5%
of the global market use of 
Intellectual Property is held 
by developing countries, reflecting 
weak Intellectual Property 
frameworks and enforcement
Only 0.5%
of foreign-direct-
investment stock 
is maintained 
by developing 
countries
Cultural goods shift 
to digital formats, 
post COVID-19
Varied approaches 
to cultural export 
promotion
Effective export 
strategies require:
Upper-middle-income developing countries 
are the main drivers of more geographically 
diverse cultural goods markets
48% ➞ 72%
of countries have visual arts export strategies, 
reflecting recognition of the sector’s strategic value
 ¡ Enabling trade 
infrastructure and policies
 ¡ Strong coordination between 
trade bodies, ministries and 
the private sector
 ¡ Intellectual Property 
protections
 ¡ Financial support
 ¡ Digitization drives growth in 
global cultural services trade
 ¡ Developing countries invest in 
e-commerce and digital tools 
to promote cultural exports
 ¡ Digital shift poses risks for 
environmental sustainability 
and cultural diversity
 ¡ Developed countries more 
often use financial incentives 
to attract investment and 
boost export readiness
 ¡ Developing countries leverage 
cultural tourism through 
festivals and trade events 
to showcase local culture
Local creative industries 
and economic development
Fairer and more inclusive 
global trade landscape
Cultural diversity
A balanced exchange of cultural goods and services is crucial for fostering:
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
126
INTRODUCTION
The Convention for the Protection and Promotion of Diversity 
of Cultural Expressions (2005 Convention) recognizes the 
vital role of international trade, foreign direct investment, 
trade agreements and support measures in enabling a more 
balanced flow of cultural goods and services1 across borders. 
Parties to the 2005 Convention commit to fostering more 
inclusive and diverse cultural exchanges through a range of 
measures. These include providing preferential treatment 
to developing countries for culture in trade agreements 
and development assistance, as well as in various bilateral, 
regional and multilateral agreements. Parties also monitor 
these flows through periodic reports to assess progress 
towards strengthening the diversity of cultural expressions in 
the global trade of cultural goods and services.
Over the past two decades, significant changes have 
reshaped the landscape in which the 2005 Convention 
operates. The COVID-19 pandemic triggered job losses and 
reduced investment in the creative sector. The structural 
deficiencies and vulnerabilities that characterized the sector 
prior to the crisis have been exacerbated, and the scale of 
their repercussions has grown substantially as a result of the 
pandemic. At the same time, the digital transformation of 
the cultural economy has also gained significant momentum. 
Nevertheless, recovery efforts revealed the sector’s social 
value and resilience. They also led to a renewed focus on 
equity, inclusion and sustainable cultural cooperation. This 
chapter explores the post-pandemic flow of cultural goods 
and services and its implications for promoting diversity and 
accessibility in an increasingly interconnected world. For 
this analysis, cultural goods and services are examined as 
two distinct trade categories. This approach is aligned with 
international trade data collection and classification systems, 
which treat categories of goods and services separately. 
Since the Convention’s adoption, upper-middle-income 
developing countries2 have made some progress by 
increasing their share of global trade in cultural goods and 
services and expanding their trading relationships to include 
both developed and developing partners. Yet global trade 
in cultural goods and services remains deeply unbalanced. 
In 2023, developing countries accounted for just over 
20% of global trade in cultural services (UNCTAD, 2025a). 
1 . The 2005 Convention states that ‘cultural activities, goods and services’ refer to 
those offerings that have a specific attribute, use or purpose, or embody or convey 
cultural expressions, irrespective of the commercial value they may have (Article 4.4). 
2. The income levels of countries presented in this chapter are based on gross national 
income (GNI) per capita, as published by the World Bank in 2022. Income thresholds 
are based on those of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
- Low-income countries: GNI per capita of less than US$1 ,135
- Lower-middle-income countries: GNI per capita between US$1 ,136 and US$4,465
- Upper-middle-income countries: GNI per capita between US$4,466 and US$13,845
According to these thresholds, countries are considered developing countries when 
their GNI per capita is below US$13,845.
This low share highlights persistent structural inequalities 
in global cultural exchange and shows that the goal of 
achieving fair and balanced trade in cultural expressions is 
still far from being realized.
With the dematerialization of cultural goods, accelerated 
by the COVID-19 pandemic, trade in cultural services has 
become an increasingly important part of overall trade 
in cultural goods and services. Reflecting this shift, the 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports indicate that developing 
countries are putting in place supportive policies and 
measures. Despite such good practice examples, developed 
nations that have better access to technology and 
infrastructure have a significant advantage in cultural 
services trade. Although developing countries are making 
progress in exporting digital cultural services, the hegemony 
of developed countries impedes the market reach of diverse 
expressions from emerging markets. This dynamic risks 
contributing to the homogenization of global cultural 
production and consumption.
The first part of this chapter examines the growth and 
diversification of trade in cultural goods and services, 
including examples of good practices. Since having capacity 
to produce cultural goods and services requires investment, 
the next section explores trends in foreign direct investment. 
This is followed by an analysis of the policies and measures 
promoting more balanced international trade, including 
preferential treatment initiatives aimed to improve access 
for cultural goods and services from developing countries to 
markets in developed countries. 
GAUGING GROWTH AND DIVERSIFICATION 
OF CULTURAL GOODS TRADE
Over the past two decades, new technologies, rapid 
digitization and the rise of online platforms have 
significantly changed the way cultural goods and services 
are produced, distributed and consumed. Cultural goods 
are increasingly being ‘dematerialized’, with physical goods, 
such as books, CDs and DVDs, being replaced by digital 
formats like e-books, music streaming and online videos. 
Services like digital design, virtual or live-streamed cultural 
events and creation of online cultural content are becoming 
major drivers of cultural goods and services trade. The lines 
between cultural goods and services are increasingly blurred. 
The analysis below is based on the distinct cultural domains 
defined by the 2009 UNESCO Framework for Cultural 
Statistics.3 Relevant domains include: cultural and natural 
heritage, visual arts and crafts (fine arts, photography), 
3. An updated version of the 2009 Framework was published in 2025 (UIS, 2025) but 
was not available in time for inclusion in this chapter. 
127
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
performance and celebration (festivals, fairs), books, 
information and press, audio-visual and interactive media 
(films, television, video games), and design and creative 
services. The analysis is also informed by administratively 
generated data from customs and excise authorities (goods) 
and data from balance of payments systems (services), also 
presented in the 2009 Framework (UIS, 2009).
Mapping the trade in cultural goods: 
momentum and market shifts
Since 2005, global trade in cultural goods has grown 
significantly, doubling in value to reach US$254.28 billion4 
by 2023, as shown in Figure 6.1 . Growth has not been 
uniform: developed countries experienced average annual 
growth of 1 .8%, while developing countries expanded 
at a significantly faster rate of 8.5%. Between 2019 and 
2023, developing countries’ share of global cultural exports 
increased from 42% to 46% (UNSD and World Bank, 2025). 
4. UNESCO and United Nations Trade and Development (UNCTAD) use different 
measurement frameworks for cultural goods trade with disparities in classifications, 
scope, granularity, methodologies, guidelines and the categorization of activities and 
products, and therefore have different numbers. The UNCTAD database shows the 
creative goods exports were valued at US$677 billion in 2023 (UNCTAD, 2025a). 
Unless otherwise indicated, the measurements refer to the 2009 UNESCO Framework 
for Cultural Statistics (UIS, 2009).
While China and India remain dominant, accounting for 19% 
and 6% of cultural goods exports respectively in 2023, a broader 
group of developing countries, including Turkey, Malaysia, 
Thailand and Indonesia, also contributed to this growth. 
Though the value of trade declined during the economic 
downturns of the 2008-2009 recession and the COVID-19 
pandemic, Figure 6.1 shows that cultural goods trade 
experienced a rapid rebound in 2010 and 201 1 and then 
again in 2021 and 2022. This can partly be explained by 
pent-up demand as well as by the sale of stock created 
during the downturns.
‘Visual arts and crafts’ remained the most traded cultural 
domain, particularly for developing countries, where imports 
surged from US$53 billion in 2004 to US$167 billion in 
2023. Other dynamic domains include ‘performance and 
celebration’, which peaked in 2022 at over US$60 billion, 
and ‘cultural and natural heritage’, where developing 
countries’ exports to developed markets grew at 15% 
annually. Understandably, trade of goods in ‘audiovisual and 
interactive media’ contracted sharply, and goods exported 
from the ‘design and creative services’ domain remained 
stagnant. This is largely due to increasing dematerialization, 
where physical goods are replaced by virtual or digital 
formats, such as when streaming services replace DVDs or 
downloadable design files replace printed materials.
Figure 6.1
Exports of cultural goods by domain (2004-2023), based on UNESCO’s 2009 Framework for Cultural Statistics
Source: ITC (2025b) / UIS (2009)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Design and creative servicesAudiovisual and interactive mediaBooks and press
Visual arts and craftsPerformance and celebrationCultural and natural heritage
Total exports of cultural goods by domain (US$ million)
128
The evolving geography of cultural goods trade: 
income, inclusion and diversification
During the initial implementation period of the 
2005 Convention, international trade was predominantly 
driven by developed countries, with the majority of 
exchanges occurring among these countries themselves. 
Cultural goods imports grew faster for developing than 
for developed countries. Developing countries’ cultural 
goods imports grew 1 1 .8% from 2004 to 2023. There was 
exceptional growth from 2020 to 2023 for both developing 
countries (27.7%) and developed countries (26.4%) 
(UNSD and World Bank, 2025). 
To better understand these trade flows, it is useful to 
unbundle countries by income group. Figure 6.2 presents a 
snapshot of trade flows from the country groups shown on 
the left axis (exporters) to the country groups shown on the 
right axis (importers) for 2007 and 2023. Country groups 
are upper-middle-income developing countries; lower-middle-
income developing countries including Least Developed 
Countries;5 and developed countries (high-income countries). 
5. Also includes Small Island Developing States and Landlocked Developing Countries.
Comparing 2007 and 2023 (Figure 6.2), the proportion 
of cultural goods trade flows from developed to developed 
countries declined while diversifying to include more 
upper-middle-income developing country partners. Indeed, 
the upper-middle-income developing countries have made 
significant progress, both in increasing their proportion of 
global cultural goods exports and in diversifying trading 
partners, who now include more developed countries 
(particularly those who are Party to the 2005 Convention) as 
well as other developing countries. The growth of especially 
upper-middle-income developing countries’ cultural goods 
exports to developed and other developing countries 
fostered the emergence of a dynamic cultural sector in 
developing countries. 
However, Least Developed Countries (including Small Island 
Developing States and Landlocked Developing Countries) 
still account for only a very small part of cultural goods 
trade. As advocated in the 2005 Convention’s Article 14 on 
cooperation for development, stronger international support 
is needed to enable these countries to participate more fully 
in global cultural goods trade. This support should come 
from high-capacity countries and requires comprehensive, 
long-term measures rather than isolated or ad hoc initiatives. 
Figure 6.2
Global cultural goods trade flows, by income-level country groups in 2007 and 2023
Source: UNSD and World Bank (2025)
Lower income Lower income
Lower-middle incomeUpper-middle income
Lower-middle income Upper-middle income
High incomeHigh income
Exporter Importer Importer
2007 2023
Exporter
Lower income Lower income
Lower-middle income
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income High income
129
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
Such measures should be aimed to strengthen capacity, 
improve market access, expand digital infrastructure and 
provide financial support. Integrated strategic planning and 
sustained capacity development are essential to strengthen 
the global presence of cultural and creative industries from 
diverse countries. 
At the same time, several developing countries have 
proactively taken steps to strengthen the export readiness 
of their cultural goods and services. For example, Senegal 
has invested in capacity development while launching 
targeted digital music export initiatives that integrate 
digital platforms. Belize’s 2023 Quadrennial Periodic 
Report highlights efforts to strengthen its cultural industries 
through policy reform, capacity building and partnerships 
with the trade and tourism sectors, positioning the Orange 
Economy6 as a national development priority. While 
initiatives led by the Institute of Creative Arts in Belize focus 
on entrepreneurship, training and intersectoral collaboration, 
a lack of comprehensive data remains a key challenge. 
Progress should be carefully monitored and evaluated.
In short, the analysis shows that among the Parties to the 
2005 Convention, developing countries have strengthened 
their position in the global trade of cultural goods; however, 
this growth has been driven primarily by middle-income 
6. The ‘orange economy’ is a collective term for the cultural and creative industries, 
highlighting their economic contribution as well as their potential for sustainable 
development. It originated in Latin American policy discourse and gained global 
recognition with the publication of an Inter-American Development Bank publication, The 
Orange Economy: An Infinite Opportunity (Buitrago Restrepo and Duque Márquez, 2013).
developing countries, while Least Developed Countries 
continue to face significant structural constraints. In 2007 , 
Parties to the Convention accounted for approximately 
75.7% of total cultural goods exports and 65.5% of 
imports. By 2023, their share of cultural goods exports 
had increased to around 79.5%, and their share of imports 
rose to 71%, reflecting enhanced overall engagement in 
the global cultural goods trade ecosystem. This growth 
suggests increasing alignment with the Convention’s 
objectives of facilitating cultural exchange and improving 
the participation of developing countries in international 
cultural markets.
International markets for visual arts
Over the past two decades, the international trade of 
fine arts has experienced significant shifts influenced by 
economic trends, geopolitical events and evolving art 
collector preferences. Economic conditions play an important 
role in the global art market, with the global financial crisis 
of 2008 contributing to a temporary contraction, with 
reduced exports and imports. The COVID-19 pandemic had 
a similar impact in 2020 (Figure 6.3).
Despite a recent decline in sales globally, the international 
fine arts market remains large. In 2024, the United States 
of America was the largest global art market, generating 
US$4.3 billion in fine arts auction sales. This was followed 
by China at US$1 .9 billion and the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland at US$1 .4 billion (Artnet, 2025).
Figure 6.3
Exports of fine arts, by developing and developed countries (2004-2023)
Source: ITC (2025b)
69% 69% 70% 74% 71%
70% 68% 64% 57% 57% 66% 66% 69% 70% 69% 67%
63% 51% 53% 49%
31% 31%
30%
26% 29%
30%
32%
36%
43% 43% 34% 34% 31% 30%
31%
33%
37%
49%
47% 51%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Developed countries (US$ billion) Developing countries (US$ billion)
130
Developing countries have increased their market share from 
just under a third of the world market in 2004 to over half 
in 2023. This growth was largely due to China, who became 
significant in both exports and imports driven by large 
investments in auction platforms, art fairs and international 
exhibitions. The African art market is also gaining increasing 
recognition. In 2024, Benin, Ethiopia and Tanzania debuted 
pavilions at the Venice Biennale, showcasing the works 
of artists like Tesfaye Urgessa and Romuald Hazoumè, 
highlighting the growing international presence of African art.
Furthermore, several Parties to the 2005 Convention 
implemented strategies to promote the export of fine arts, 
reflecting its growing relevance as a form of cultural goods 
trade. Certain interventions directly stimulate fine arts 
exports, such as the Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism’s 
inclusion of visual arts in its national export strategy; this 
strategy offers tax incentives and grants to support galleries, 
museums and participation in international exhibitions. 
Iceland now has a Visual Arts Policy for 2023-2030 that 
aims to increase international visibility and export-readiness 
of fine arts, including trade facilitation through cultural 
diplomacy and partnerships with embassies.
Other interventions are aimed at reducing administrative 
costs and promoting market access. Online art marketplaces 
and digital auctions have facilitated cross-border 
transactions, making it easier for collectors to acquire 
works from international artists. For example, Argentina 
has digitized the mandatory legal notification process for 
the import and export of artworks, which enables smoother 
international transactions for artists and galleries. In 
South Africa, several large fine arts auction houses have 
implemented live and hybrid online auctions, digital 
catalogues and timed online auctions to complement their 
in-person events, reaching international buyers more easily 
(Shaw, 2023). 
REMAPPING CULTURAL SERVICES 
IN A GLOBAL DIGITAL CONTEXT 
In the past quarter-century, advancing technologies have 
ushered in new business models that are affecting how 
goods and services, and particularly in the cultural sector, are 
being produced, distributed and consumed. Globalization, 
societal developments and a more entrepreneurial-oriented 
system of public funding are reinforcing changing business 
models (Loots et al., 2022). These phenomena are also 
impacting value chains, including in the cultural sector, 
which are becoming increasingly global.
Streaming culture: digitization, dematerialization 
and their implications for inclusion, equity and 
sustainable development 
Digital trade is growing faster than ‘non-digital’ trade 
(González et al., 2023). The 2022 edition of the UNESCO 
Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report showed how the 
COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the trend towards the 
digitization of trade in cultural goods and services. Trade 
in physical goods in the ‘audio-visual and interactive 
media’ and in the ‘design and creative services’ domains 
has shifted almost entirely to digital trade. Music once 
distributed on CDs now streams through digital services; 
print newspapers are now available as digital editions; 
and photographs are shared and sold via stock platforms, 
digital galleries and social media. Digitization has lowered 
barriers to entry for creators by reducing production and 
distribution costs, while also opening up new avenues for 
monetization through global platforms, micro-payments 
and direct-to-consumer sales.
While technology increasingly allows buyers and sellers to 
place and receive orders from around the world, the lack of 
comprehensive and comparable time-series data on digital 
trade makes it difficult to quantify or even estimate the 
value of digitally ordered or delivered trade (Magdeleine 
and Maurer, 2016; IMF et al., 2023). Nevertheless, by using 
the International Monetary Fund’s Extended Balance of 
Payments Services classifications (IMF, 2009) and estimates 
from the Balanced Trade in Services (BaTIS) database 
developed jointly by the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and World Trade 
Organization (OECD and WTO, 2025), it is possible to infer 
the direction and size of services trade (OECD and WTO, 
2021; OECD, 2023). Overall, BaTIS data indicate that 
cultural services trade is dominated by developed countries. 
For ‘international trade in creative services’ (UNCTAD, 
2025c),7 Figure 6.4 shows that, although this category 
is still dominated by developed countries, who held an 
80% share in 2023, the position of developing countries 
is improving and accounted for 20% of the global total 
service trade in this category in 2023, up from 12% 
in 2010.
OECD (2023) data show that, in the ‘audio-visual and 
related services’ trade category, developed countries 
have a distinct advantage, with a market share of 87.1%. 
Nevertheless, the gap is narrowing: developing countries 
have increased their trade in this category by 12.1% per year 
since 2020, while developed countries have grown at 6.4%. 
7. The data presented estimate the creative services exports of selected groups of 
economies. The dataset is therefore ‘experimental’, as noted in UNCTAD (2025d).
131
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
Figure 6.4
Share of personal, cultural and recreational services trade exports, by developed countries (2010-2023)
Source: UNCTAD (2025c)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Total exports of cultural services (US$ million) Share of developed countries in total exports of cultural services
However, developing countries generally perform poorly in 
the ‘use of Intellectual Property’ services trade category, 
which includes payments for the use of copyrights, 
trademarks, patents and licensing fees related to cultural 
content such as music, films, books, software and 
broadcasting rights. It also covers royalties and licensing 
income generated through cross-border access to Intellectual 
Property, including digital streaming and distribution. In 
this category, developing countries hold less than 5% of the 
global market and have an annual growth rate of only 6.1%. 
This shift towards dematerialization, especially through 
digitized cultural goods and services trade, has both positive 
and negative implications for environmentally sustainable 
development and cultural diversification. 
On the positive side, digital trade reduces reliance on 
physical production and transportation of goods, decreasing 
carbon emissions associated with these activities, linking 
to Sustainable Development Goal 12 to enable more 
sustainable consumption and production patterns. Digital 
products can also broaden access to diverse cultural 
expressions, enabling creators from under-represented 
regions to reach global audiences, fostering cultural diversity 
and addressing Sustainable Development Goal 10 on 
reducing inequalities. 
However, as further discussed in Chapter 8 on culture and 
sustainable development, the energy-intensive operations 
of data centres and digital networks which power online 
platforms, increase electricity consumption, contributing 
to carbon emissions and climate change (Goldman Sachs, 
2024; IEA, 2025). Moreover, emerging creatives, especially 
in developing regions, face unfair compensation and 
exploitation on some platforms that now dominate the 
market, undermining economic sustainability (Sustainable 
Development Goal 8) and equitable development 
(Desrochers, 2024). Inequalities may also arise from the 
‘digital divide’, which refers to the lack of infrastructure, skills 
and affordability in many developing countries that hinders 
creators from participating in digital cultural services trade 
(UNCTAD, 2024b). It is therefore imperative to strengthen 
international cooperation for capacity building and trade 
development, ensuring that under-represented countries are 
equipped with the necessary infrastructure, human capital 
and enabling policy frameworks to participate more fully in 
digital cultural services trade. 
Changing regional shares in trade in audio-visual 
and related services
The ‘audio-visual and related services’ (AVRS) sector is one 
of the domains in which cultural goods trade has declined 
dramatically as markets have shifted from material goods to 
dematerialized digital products. Although services data for 
this category are not yet available for all countries, recent 
years appear to show interesting regional shifts in exports. 
The dominance of America (mainly North America) remains, 
with this region accounting for 47.09% of the value of 
global AVRS exports in 2022 (Table 6.1). 
132
BOX 6.1 • The rise of Nigeria’s creative economy
From 1980 until 1986, the Nigerian economy experienced a severe recession. Film production ceased, the music recording 
industry declined and cinemas closed. Ironically, this created space for the emergence of a new form of creative economy, 
such as the films produced by ‘Nollywood’. The Nollywood business model was based on short production times, low 
budgets, and distribution via VHS tapes, sold informally in local markets. The emergence of digital technology subsequently 
opened up possibilities for much wider content distribution building on and expanding a ‘paradigm shift towards 
entrepreneurial self-assertion in global cultural economies’ (Faidi, 2024).
Nollywood produces an average of 2,500 films per year and is the second-largest global film producer (by volume). In 
2023, the film and music-recording sectors contributed US$1 .4 billion to Nigeria’s gross domestic product (International 
Trade Administration, 2025). To compete internationally, however, the industry has had to professionalize and formalize, 
a shift that has been driven by trained creative professionals and funding through initiatives such as the Central Bank of 
Nigeria’s Creative Industry Financing Initiative, established in 2018. Institutions such as the Copyright Society of Nigeria 
(COSON) have also played an important role in industry development. COSON is a collective management organization 
that is authorized to license public use of musical works and sound recordings in Nigeria and collect royalties on behalf of 
copyright owners, ensuring that musicians and producers are remunerated for the use of their works. COSON is also engaged 
in public awareness campaigns, capacity building for rights holders, and enforcement activities including litigation and 
lobbying for stronger Intellectual Property enforcement.
Nigerian exports are still dominated by primary products, such as mineral fuels and oils, but the creative economy is increasingly 
recognized as a future growth path that is more environmentally sustainable than fossil fuel extraction and mining. It is also 
likely that official international trade data underestimate the reach of Nollywood. Tools such as Google Trends, which capture 
informal distribution through platforms like YouTube where content can be accessed without subscription, show a significant 
increase in search interest for ‘Nollywood’ between 2019 and 2024 (Figure 6.5), which is sustained in the post-COVID period. 
While most YouTube searches for Nollywood come from Nigeria, they are closely followed by a variety of other African countries 
(including Ghana, Liberia and Sierra Leone – a combined market of more than 50 million people). Australia, Canada, India and 
the United States also show some penetration, suggesting potential for future formal trade in these countries.
However, while international platforms can help creators reach larger audiences, they also tend to capture a significant 
share of the value, meaning that less revenue reaches local creatives. To fully realize the financial potential of Nigeria’s 
creative output, stronger production infrastructure and a sustained, well-structured system of support and legislation for 
the creative industries are essential. 
Source: Faidi, 2024; International Trade Administration, 2025
Figure 6.5
YouTube searches for Nollywood movies worldwide (2019-2024)
10/2019 10/2020 10/2021 10/2022 10/2023 10/2024
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Search interest (0-100  index)Source: Google Trends
133
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
However, Asia’s share of AVRS exports has risen 
dramatically (from 6.28% in 2018 to 20.70% in 2022, 
even without including data from China), and they had 
the fastest annual average growth rate between 2018 and 
2022 (33.6%). African countries still account for a very 
small proportion of global AVRS exports, but the region’s 
annual average growth rate between 2013 and 2017 was 
22.09%, slowing to 3.16% between 2018 and 2022. 
Europe’s share of AVRS exports fell from 39.16% in 2018 
to 29.73% in 2022, also reflected in a fall in average 
annual growth rate from 26.52% between 2008 and 2012, 
to -7.45% between 2018 and 2022.
Table 6.1
Regional shares of audio-visual and related services 
exports in 2018 and 2022
2018 (%) 2022 (%)
Africa 1. 07 1 .26
America 51. 75 47.09
Asia* 6.28 20.70
Europe 39.16 29.73
Oceania 1. 74 1 .22
*Excluding China 
Source: ITC (2025b) / Authors’ own analysis
POLICIES AND MEASURES PROMOTING 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN CULTURAL 
GOODS AND SERVICES
Export strategies
There has been an across-the-board increase in the 
percentage of Parties to the 2005 Convention who have put 
in place strategies or measures to support the distribution 
of cultural goods and services by domain between the 
2017-2020 reporting period and the 2021-2024 period 
(Figure 6.6). Visual arts and film are the domains with 
the most Parties reporting export strategies, followed by 
performing arts and music. The pattern demonstrates many 
countries’ growing recognition that cultural goods and 
services trade is an important component of growth and 
development, in addition to its value in cultural diplomacy 
and building intercultural understanding. As demonstrated 
by the Republic of Korea’s example in Box 6.2, export 
strategies are most effective when they adopt an integrated 
approach, ensuring a high level of coordination between 
trade bodies and government ministries, comprehensive 
financial support mechanisms and measures to strengthen 
Intellectual Property protection. 
Figure 6.6
Proportion of Parties reporting export strategies or 
measures to support the distribution of cultural goods 
and services, by cultural domain
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) 
Parties to the 2005 Convention also report initiatives to 
develop e-commerce platforms that support the export 
potential of their cultural goods and services. For example, 
Armenia has implemented a ‘unified automated system 
of e-culture’ aimed at digitizing cultural expressions and 
making them accessible. This initiative supports the 
development of cultural goods and services for e-commerce 
platforms, enhancing visibility and export potential. The 
‘Brazil Games’ initiative is an e-commerce-based programme 
promoting Brazilian video game exports. The programme 
provides visibility for Brazilian video game developers 
and studios by supporting their participation in major 
international game industry events and trade shows and 
accessing investment opportunities. Through the Brazil 
Games programme, eligible companies can also access the 
Export Qualification Program of the Brazilian Trade and 
Investment Promotion Agency which supports companies 
in exporting their games or operating internationally 
(Brazilian Game Developers Association, 2025).
48%
50%
48%
61%
33%
38%
33%
66%
72%
62%
65%
64%
51%
60%
45%
72%
Visual arts
Publishing
Performing arts
Music
Media arts
Design
Cultural management
Cinema/
Audio-visual arts
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
134
BOX 6.2 • The rise of K-culture: copyright and the export of cultural content
The ‘Korean wave’ or Hallyu refers to the phenomenal global success of the Republic of Korea’s cultural and creative content 
industries, despite the language and cultural differences between the Republic of Korea and their international consumers. 
Recent examples of their success include the Oscar-winning film Parasite (2020) and the series Squid Game (2021-2025) 
released on Netflix. Music known as K-pop is also exported with great success to international markets, fuelled by online 
platforms and social media fan communities. 
In 2022, the Republic of Korea’s content-based industry exports, including film, music, broadcasting and gaming, were worth 
US$13.2 billion, surpassing that of other key export sectors such as secondary batteries and electric vehicles (Korea JoongAng 
Daily, 2024). Copyright exports grew at an average annual rate of 28% per year between 2010 and 2018, changing Korea’s 
trade balance in this area from a deficit to a surplus from 2013 onwards (UNCTAD, 2024a).
A recent report, K-content goes global: how government support and copyright policy fuelled the Republic of Korea’s creative 
economy, details the ways in which the Republic of Korea has designed and implemented a highly coordinated strategy 
to support the production and export of cultural content. The strategy has involved a high level of coordination between 
government departments, comprehensive financial support mechanisms and strong protection of copyright. 
The Republic of Korea was strategic in putting in place copyright reforms before the establishment of trade agreements with 
the European Union and the United States, which were important for promoting cultural exports and protecting Korean 
content. The most recent Quadrennial Periodic Report describes the publication of an Export Guide on Book Copyright by 
the Republic of Korea Copyright Commission. The guide assists Korean copyright holders with knowledge about copyright 
licensing procedures, market entry strategies and case studies of successful exports. It is intended to support rights holders, 
publishers and authors in expanding their presence in global markets, particularly in translation and rights sales.
At the same time, copyright legislation is only effective if it is updated to take into account changes in the digital 
environment and can be enforced without great burden to creatives (Peukert and Windisch, 2025). The Republic of Korea 
authorized copyright management organizations, put in place a copyright authentication service and provided standardized 
copyright contracts with statutory damages to be paid in cases of copyright infringements. These measures shifted much of 
the burden of enforcement from creatives to those accused of copyright infringement and have proved a powerful way of 
growing exports. 
Source: Republic of Korea QPR, 2022; Korea JoongAng Daily, 2024; UNCTAD, 2024a; Peukert and Windisch, 2025
Moving up the value chain
Declining transport costs and changes in technology 
have led to global supply chains becoming increasingly 
geographically fragmented. Components of goods may 
be produced and assembled in several different countries 
before they are sold to the final user. The ‘smile curve’ 
theory (Shih, 1996; Mudambi, 2008) examines the stages 
of production at which the most value is added. It suggests 
that the most value is added at the initial and final stages 
of the production process. Early stages involve product 
development and innovation (generating Intellectual 
Property), the middle stages involve assembly or production 
(sometimes outsourced to developing countries), and final 
stages involve branding and marketing. A recent study 
(Yanıkkaya et al., 2023) of 34 sectors in 40 countries 
confirms this pattern, which also applies to cultural and 
creative industries with intangible assets (innovation, 
Intellectual Property and branding) generating up to twice 
as much value as tangible capital (UNCTAD, 2022).
In this context, efforts to foster a more balanced and 
inclusive international environment may be supported 
by enabling developing countries to further valorize the 
Intellectual Property embedded in their cultural goods and 
services, including through the development of culturally 
grounded branding. Measures reported by several Parties 
to the 2005 Convention show this trend. For example, 
Ghana has implemented the ‘Made-in-Ghana’ policy, 
which aims to add value to and market its cultural goods 
and services both regionally and internationally. Such 
country-of-origin branding initiatives can serve as a seal of 
quality (in the case of Ghana its ‘Made in Ghana’ label is 
trademark protected and reserved only for products that 
meet an established criteria), while also promoting the 
specific cultural qualities or characteristics associated with 
their place of origin.
135
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
BOX 6.3 •  Creative Jordan: leveraging public-
private partnerships
The cultural and creative industries in the Hashemite 
Kingdom of Jordan represent a diverse and 
strategically significant sector, including design 
services, architecture, film, publishing, software 
development and artisanal crafts. These industries 
employ over 25,000 people, which is 3% of the 
national workforce, and are characterized by low 
barriers to entry, as well as growing integration with 
digital technologies. Nevertheless, the sector faces 
challenges, including fragmented support structures 
and limited access to international markets, due to 
weak Intellectual Property protection and testing 
facilities. Despite these constraints, the sector is 
prioritized in Jordan’s Economic Modernization Vision 
for its potential to drive innovation, job creation and 
cultural branding (GIZ, 2024).
Creative Jordan is a public-private initiative that aims 
to strengthen the international positioning of the 
Jordanian fashion and design sectors by supporting 
cultural entrepreneurs in accessing international 
markets. Public partners include the Ministry of 
Culture, Jordan Enterprise Development Corporation 
and the Jordanian Association for Arts and Crafts; 
private sector partners include major trade centres and 
other private sector stakeholders. 
This initiative provides technical training and 
mentorship to young designers in areas such 
as garment production, branding and export 
documentation. It supports the participation of 
Jordanian producers in international trade fairs and 
fashion exhibitions and in providing exposure to 
foreign buyers, thereby linking the domestic fashion 
ecosystem to global value chains (Jordan Strategy 
Forum, 2022).
By increasing cultural exports and raising the 
international profile of Jordanian fashion, Creative 
Jordan demonstrates how targeted cultural policy that 
involves both public and private sector stakeholders 
can successfully promote cultural exports and 
strengthen local industries.
Source: Jordan QPR, 2024; GIZ, 2024; Jordan Strategy Forum, 2022
Another potential area for export growth is the African 
fashion and design sector. Rather than reinforcing Africa’s 
role as only a market for goods produced in the Global 
North, or as a site of low-value clothing production 
for developed country brands, fashion designers on 
the continent have been developing their own brands. 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s fashion market was valued at 
US$31 billion in 2020, and while this indicates significant 
domestic demand, the region continues to face a 
substantial trade deficit of approximately US$7.6 billion 
in these sectors, largely due to the export of raw fibres 
and heavy reliance on imported finished goods (UNESCO, 
2023). Nonetheless, the sector holds strong potential 
for value addition and export growth through local 
processing, improved infrastructure and strategic brand 
development. African fashion brands are also gaining 
visibility and influence through high-profile fashion weeks 
held in 32 countries, including Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal 
and South Africa.
Ethiopia’s African Fashion Week, for example, aims to 
elevate the country’s cultural and creative industries and 
promote the international visibility of African fashion 
by providing a global platform for designers, artisans 
and fashion entrepreneurs. Through runway shows, 
exhibitions and trade-focused events, it facilitates market 
access and trade promotion for local fashion products, 
especially traditional textiles and contemporary design 
innovations. The event serves as a trade catalyst, attracting 
international buyers, fostering business-to-business linkages 
and enhancing the competitiveness of the Ethiopian 
fashion industry in global markets.
136
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Foreign direct investment (FDI) can be an important 
source of capital, especially for developing countries. 
Research has also shown that investment by foreign 
firms can transfer skills to the host country, increasing 
innovation, productivity and employment. However, 
these positive impacts are more likely where host firms 
have enough absorptive capacity (human capital and 
technology) to benefit from such spillovers. FDI can also 
be exploitative, with the potential to crowd out domestic 
investment and with foreign firms repatriating profits 
generated in the host country (Fazio et al., 2024).
Although there is currently little research or data relating 
specifically to FDI in the cultural sector, there is information 
on the stock of FDI in the arts, recreation and entertainment 
sector,8 as reported by the Investment Map database (ITC, 
2025a).9 While FDI flows measure new investments, FDI 
stock shows the accumulated level of foreign investment, 
which is a more comprehensive picture of foreign capital 
embedded in an economy over time. Analysis of the 
Investment Map data reveals a significant imbalance in FDI 
stock between developed and developing countries from 
2014 to 2022 (Figure 6.7). 
Figure 6.7
Inward foreign-direct-investment stock in the arts, 
recreation and entertainment category, by developing 
and developed countries (2014-2022)
Source: ITC (2025a)
8. This sector, according to Investment Map, includes arts creation and performing arts 
activities; library, archives, museum and other cultural activities; gambling and betting 
activities; sports activities; and amusement and recreation activities.
9. FDI data often faces challenges such as inconsistent reporting standards, gaps in 
coverage and delays in updates. For developing countries, these issues are compounded 
by limited statistical infrastructure, leading to potential underestimation of FDI stock. 
24.8
19.4 22.6
34.3
27.2 30 32.3 33.7
19.1
4.1
4.2
4
3.2
3.8
3.8
3.6 0.2
0.1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Developed countries (US$ billion) Developing countries (US$ billion)
In developed countries, FDI stock started at US$24.8 billion 
in 2014, peaked at US$34.3 billion in 2017 , and then 
declined sharply to US$19.1 billion by 2022. In contrast, 
developing countries maintained a much smaller FDI stock, 
beginning at US$4.1 billion in 2014 and then plummeting 
to US$0.1 billion in 2022. These figures highlight the 
outsized role of developed economies in this sector, 
consistently accounting for 85-99% of total FDI stock, while 
developing countries’ share dwindled from 14.2% in 2014 
to just 0.5% in 2022.
The disparity in FDI stock underscores broader economic 
dynamics. Developed countries, with their established 
markets, infrastructure and investor confidence, 
attract significantly more investment in cultural and 
entertainment industries, which often require substantial 
capital and stable returns. The sharp decline in 2022 for 
both groups may reflect global economic challenges, such 
as post-pandemic recovery or shifting investor priorities, 
though developed nations retained a robust base. 
Developing countries, however, faced a near collapse in 
FDI stock, particularly after 2020, suggesting heightened 
vulnerability to external shocks and a lack of sustained 
investment interest. Annual growth rates further illustrate 
this instability: while developed countries saw periods of 
positive growth (for example, 16.4% in 2016), developing 
countries experienced frequent and severe declines (for 
example, -20.7% in 2017 and -95.5% in 2021). 
However, there is also some evidence that FDI in the 
sector can be stimulated by interest in cultural content. 
For example, a study on the growth of the Republic of 
Korea’s investment in Indonesia’s cultural content industry 
(Drianda et al., 2023) shows that inward FDI from Korea 
to Indonesia has shifted from a historical focus on heavy 
industry and manufacturing to include sectors such 
as broadcasting, television, film and music. The rising 
popularity of Korean film, television, music and other 
cultural content in Indonesia is associated with rising 
inward FDI from Korean companies who are interested 
in accessing Indonesian markets. Other factors, such as 
bilateral cooperation agreements relating to the creative 
economy, have also facilitated joint ventures and new 
investments in the sector.
In 2022, Bulgaria implemented a reimbursement scheme 
for foreign productions in the audio-visual sector to 
attract foreign film production, which is a form of FDI 
inflow. The scheme provides a cash rebate of up to 25% 
of eligible costs incurred in Bulgaria. It is managed by the 
National Film Center and aims to increase the country’s 
competitiveness as a destination for international film and 
television productions. The measure supports cultural and 
economic development and enhances Bulgaria’s profile in 
the global audio-visual market. 
137
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
TRADE PROMOTION AND CAPACITY 
DEVELOPMENT MEASURES
Strengthening export capacity in the cultural sector is 
central to growing and diversifying cultural trade. Reports 
from Parties highlight how developing countries, often 
with support from developed countries, are enhancing their 
ability to trade cultural goods and services. These efforts 
largely focus on improving internal systems, including both 
physical and digital trade infrastructure. For instance, an 
example of a physical infrastructure upgrade can be seen 
in the Gambia, which reports receiving support through the 
African Continental Free Trade Area to improve port facilities 
to facilitate export trade, especially for small and medium-
sized enterprises including those in the cultural and creative 
industries. An example of digital infrastructure development 
is the initiative by Niue under the PACER Plus programme10 
to develop digital platforms for cultural products and provide 
e-commerce coaching to small businesses, including online 
galleries, craft portals and artist exchange programmes.
The radar chart in Figure 6.8 presents a comparative index 
of the frequency with which six types of trade-related 
cultural measures appeared in the Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports, disaggregated by country income group. Each axis 
of the chart represents one of these categories, with values 
normalized from 0 to 1 based on the relative frequency of 
mentions in the reports. While almost all Parties reported 
some form of trade promotion and capacity development 
measures, supported by financial investment or funding, 
and cooperation agreements, progress in some areas is 
strongly differentiated by level of development. Developed 
countries were far more likely to have provided tax incentive 
measures for cultural exports than developing countries, 
and to have put in place online platforms and databases 
to support international cultural goods and services trade. 
In contrast, Least Developed Countries and lower-middle-
income countries report these measures far less frequently 
than other groups. 
Organizing festivals and trade events is a common strategy 
among developing countries to promote cultural exports; 
these events also act as important drivers of cultural tourism. 
By leveraging cultural assets such as cultural venues, 
festivals, arts and heritage to attract international visitors, 
countries can generate considerable value from cultural 
tourism as an export in its own right. Strengthening linkages 
between the creative and tourism sectors could provide a 
strategic approach for a country to boost its cultural exports 
on the international stage. 
10. PACER Plus is a regional trade development agreement designed to support Pacific 
Island countries to participate in and benefit from regional and global trade. Ten 
countries are Parties to the agreement: Australia, Cook Islands, Kiribati, New Zealand, 
Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
Figure 6.8
Trade promotion and capacity development measures 
reported by Parties, by income-level country groups 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) / Authors’ own analysis
Examples from the Quadrennial Periodic Reports illustrate 
how festivals, cultural markets and trade shows are 
used to promote a country’s cultural exports and attract 
cultural tourism. For instance, Jordan’s Karama Human 
Rights Film Festival and East Africa’s JAMAFEST offer 
platforms for cultural exchange, market access and tourism 
promotion. Similarly, Côte d’Ivoire’s Abidjan African Arts 
and Performance Market, a biennial performing arts event 
backed by the Economic Community of West African States, 
facilitates the export of performing arts by attracting 
international programmers and audiences while offering 
training and capacity building for artists, especially 
youth, across West Africa. Although less widespread, 
some developing countries are advancing digital trade 
promotion. The Digital Senegal 2025 strategy exemplifies 
this shift, supporting online platforms like Marodi TV, 
which has gained international distribution partnerships 
and plays a key role in the region’s digital creative 
economy.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Tax incentive measures
Cooperation
agreements
Festivals
Financial investment or funding
Online
platform or
database use
Capacity
development
measures
Developed countries
Least Developed Countries
Lower-middle-income countries
Upper-middle-income countries
138
Facilitating trade through preferential treatment 
Article 16 of the 2005 Convention is binding for Parties to 
the Convention and calls on developed countries to grant 
preferential treatment to developing countries, particularly 
in the areas of trade in cultural goods and services. Such 
measures aim to facilitate cultural exchange and market 
access and intersect with other dimensions of international 
cultural cooperation, including the mobility of artists 
and cultural professionals, as explored in Chapter 5, and 
provisions embedded in bilateral and multilateral treaties 
and agreements, examined in Chapter 7. These measures 
need to be non-reciprocal and benefit developing countries’ 
production of cultural goods and services, as well as their 
creative professionals. 
Analysis of the Quadrennial Periodic Reports reveals 
measures aligned with this obligation, including tariff 
exemptions and trade agreements enabling duty-free 
cultural exports. A notable example is the CARIFORUM-
European Union Economic Partnership Agreement, signed 
in 2008, which references the 2005 Convention and 
facilitates EU-Caribbean collaboration through mobility, 
co-productions and capacity building. Although exports 
of cultural goods and services remain modest, over the 
years the Agreement has spurred European Union-funded 
initiatives such as Creative Caribbean, and institutional 
efforts like Jamaica’s JAMPRO and Trinidad and Tobago’s 
CreativeTT. 
Broader programmes include the DEENTAL initiative, 
launched in 2017 by the Centre national du cinéma et de 
l’image animée (National Centre of Cinema) in France and 
expanded in 2020 through the DEENTAL-ACP programme, 
as a mechanism to strengthen international film co-
production with countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the 
Pacific. With financial support from the European Union 
and the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific 
States, it improves the access to audio-visual works from 
these regions by facilitating their entry into European 
markets and their eligibility for European funding. The 
programme operates through two complementary funding 
streams: an automatic support mechanism known as the 
DEENTAL bonus, which rewards productions from these 
regions that already benefit from local or regional public 
funding, and a selective co-production fund called the 
IMAGE fund, which encourages partnerships with European 
producers. By bridging financing gaps and facilitating 
cross-regional collaboration, DEENTAL-ACP enhances the 
visibility, distribution potential and economic viability of 
cultural productions from developing countries, while also 
reinforcing local creative ecosystems and fostering long-
term industry development.
BOX 6.4 •  Romania’s cultural trade ecosystem: 
engagement with European Union 
mechanisms and global networks
Romania has a wide array of cultural and creative 
products that combine traditional heritage with 
contemporary innovation. Key sectors include crafts, 
music, cinema, fashion, publishing and video game 
development. Romania also produces modern creative 
goods and services in areas such as publishing and 
translation, architecture and design, and is a regional 
hub for video game development (RGDA, 2023). 
Romania offers an example of a connected ecosystem 
to support cultural exports by systematically linking 
national initiatives with international opportunities. 
Through coordinated action among the Ministry 
of Culture, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and 
intermediary institutions such as the Romanian 
Creative Europe Desk and other Romanian cultural 
institutes, Romania has established an infrastructure 
that supports artists and cultural professionals to 
engage in international trade of cultural goods and 
services in a sustained and strategic manner. 
In addition, Romania’s cultural institutes, operating 
under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, are embedded 
in the European Union National Institutes for Culture 
network. These institutes extend Romania’s cultural 
presence internationally and serve as nodes of 
global engagement. The system is further reinforced 
by support for participation in international fairs 
and festivals, where Romanian creators receive 
travel grants, translation subsidies and promotional 
assistance to present their work in global international 
cultural markets.
These mutually reinforcing layers of support (national 
support, European Union funding access, international 
presence and artist services) constitute a connected 
system that is effectively promoting the export of 
cultural products. 
Source: Romania QPR, 2024; RGDA, 2023 
139
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
Canada’s Fund for Young Francophone Creatives supports 
emerging artists from sub-Saharan Africa and Haiti through 
residencies, professional development and mobility, 
without requiring reciprocity – meeting the Convention’s 
definition of preferential treatment.
However, not all measures reported as preferential 
treatment by Parties in their Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports meet the requirements. This may be due to a 
lack of knowledge and understanding among Parties 
of preferential treatment in the strict sense of the 
Convention’s Article 16. Some developing countries report 
engaging in reciprocal agreements with other developing 
countries. For example, under India’s Comprehensive 
Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement, 
Mauritius and India exchanged market access in cultural 
services. Nigeria reported receiving scholarships and 
training support from partners like China and the Republic 
of Korea. While not strictly qualifying as preferential 
treatment under Article 16, such initiatives still foster 
cultural diversity and South-South cooperation. 
Leveraging Aid for Trade 
Aid for Trade,11 a form of official development assistance, 
supports developing countries and Least Developed 
Countries in building trade capacity and infrastructure. Aid 
for Trade provides additional support so that countries can 
benefit from trade liberalization. It is aligned with both the 
2005 Convention and Sustainable Development Goal 8 
and its target 8.B, which specifically refers to Aid for Trade 
and calls on support for developing countries, especially 
Least Developed Countries, so they can build trade-related 
infrastructure, institutions and capacities, and benefit from 
global trade and economic integration. 
While specific data on cultural sector funding are limited, 
the OECD and the World Trade Organization (2024) show 
that US$648 billion was allocated globally to Aid for 
Trade from 2006 to 2022. Few of the resulting projects 
targeted the cultural and creative industries. However, 
some countries reported prioritizing this area: Jamaica 
and Mali, for instance, include exports of cultural goods 
and services in their national economic development 
strategies. Parties to the Convention reported examples 
of culture-focused Aid for Trade, but this seems to be a 
somewhat underutilized instrument in the promotion of 
more balanced trade in cultural goods and services.
11.  https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/devel_e/a4t_e/aid4trade_e.htm; 
https://www.oecd.org/en/about/programmes/aid-for-trade.html.
The Netherlands (Kingdom of the) reported, for example, 
the Cultural Participation Fund, which supports training 
workshops, business incubation for creative enterprises 
and grant mechanisms to support market-ready creative 
product programmes in the Caribbean and in several 
African countries.
Canada’s Expert Deployment Mechanism provides 
trade-related technical assistance to countries such as 
Colombia, Paraguay and Viet Nam. Support includes legal 
guidance on trade agreement negotiation and small and 
medium-sized enterprise export readiness in the creative 
sector. The programme facilitates short-term deployments 
of Canadian experts to provide technical advice on 
cultural and creative industries within broader trade 
development programmes.
The OECD-World Trade Organization Aid for Trade 
monitoring report (2024) shows that both donor 
countries and recipients regard Aid for Trade as having 
the most impact in trade-facilitation measures, followed 
by trade policy and regulation. Notably, 81% of partner 
countries identified the expansion of the digital economy, 
which includes e-commerce, as a strategic priority in 
their national development planning. Additionally, 84% 
emphasized the continued need for Aid for Trade support 
to strengthen cross-sectoral e-commerce capacity. Given 
the increase in the trade of digital cultural goods and 
services, Aid for Trade could be used more extensively as 
a strategy to achieve more balanced trade in the future. 
140
CONCLUSION
Over the 20 years since the adoption of the 
2005 Convention, trade in cultural goods and services 
has evolved. Although developed countries continue to 
dominate global markets, there has been some evidence 
of progress. Global trade is gradually diversifying, with a 
growing number of developing countries participating in the 
exchange of cultural goods and services, consistent with the 
aims of Article 1(c) of the Convention. However, persistent 
structural imbalances remain: in 2023, developing countries 
accounted for 20% of global trade in cultural services, 
underscoring how far the goal of balanced cultural 
exchange is from being achieved.
These patterns have been influenced by multiple factors, 
including the economic growth of trading partners, shifts 
in trade policy, international agreements and regulation, as 
well as the expansion of digital technologies. Digitalization, 
accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, has transformed 
cultural trade. While this creates new opportunities, the 
technological advantage of developed countries continues 
to reinforce asymmetries in digital cultural services, limiting 
the global reach of diverse cultural expressions from 
emerging markets.
Trade flows, which were disrupted by the COVID-19 
pandemic, have recovered strongly. An analysis of trade 
data from 2007 to 2023 shows that upper-middle-income 
developing countries have expanded their share of global 
cultural goods trade, which aligns with the objectives of the 
2005 Convention. However, lower-middle-income countries 
and Least Developed Countries (especially Small Island 
Developing States and Landlocked Developing Countries) 
remain under-represented, underscoring the need for 
targeted and comprehensive capacity building and market 
access support. This observation confirms that progress is 
uneven and that structural barriers persist. It is imperative to 
recognize the significance of enhancing the involvement of 
all developing countries in order to achieve a truly balanced 
and inclusive global trade system. This is not only a matter 
of economic policy but also a crucial aspect of safeguarding 
and diversifying cultural goods and services.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) patterns further reflect these 
disparities: developed economies accounted for 85-99% of 
global FDI stock in the arts, recreation and entertainment 
sector between 2014 and 2022, while developing countries 
experienced a near collapse after 2020.
Global trade in cultural services has become increasingly 
important in the post-COVID era as many cultural goods 
have moved to digital formats (UNCTAD, 2024b). 
While developing countries are increasingly investing 
in e-commerce platforms and systems to help promote 
cultural goods and services exports, their participation in 
digital trade continues to be hampered by persistent digital 
divides, unfair remuneration for emerging creators and high 
demands linked to data infrastructures. Strengthening the 
promotion and regulation of digital cultural services trade 
as well as leveraging Intellectual Property to move up the 
value chain are important strategies for protecting cultural 
diversity and promoting more balanced trade flows. 
Encouragingly, a much higher percentage of Parties to the 
Convention reported having export strategies or measures 
in place to support trade in cultural goods and services 
during 2021-2024 than in 2017-2020. However, developing 
countries need to invoke the 2005 Convention more 
frequently when negotiating bilateral and multinational 
trade agreements, especially considering the increasing 
importance of digital services trade. 
A key part of tracking the flow of cultural goods and services 
will be the improvement of data collection, and progress is 
being made in this area. Internationally comparable data are 
important and are governed by the United Nations’ System 
of National Accounts. Building on this, the Handbook on 
Measuring Digital Trade (IMF et al., 2023) differentiates 
between four modes of digital trade, including digitally 
ordered and digitally delivered trade. The framework 
introduced by the Handbook will allow for much better 
measurement of many aspects of cultural goods and services 
trade, like music and film streaming, online games, digital 
art and illustration services, as well as physical cultural 
goods like books, crafts or fashion sold via e-commerce. 
UNCTAD’s informal working group on data for services trade 
and development policies has also led to the creation of a 
web portal to serve as a knowledge-sharing hub on trade 
in services. Currently under development, this portal will 
provide policy makers and technical experts with data for 
policy making, as well as a repository showcasing innovative 
use of existing data, which will make future analysis of 
cultural services trade more informative and accurate. 
Most recently, the revised UNESCO Framework for Cultural 
Statistics (UIS, 2025) introduces updated definitions and 
classifications for cultural goods and services, allowing 
for more accurate alignment with international trade 
and customs data. It enhances the ability to track cross-
border flows by incorporating digital cultural products and 
improving the distinction between cultural and non-cultural 
components in trade statistics.
141
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade 
For governments and public bodies
 ¡ Implement comprehensive export strategies that 
strengthen coordination among trade bodies, 
government ministries and the private sector; 
expand financial support mechanisms; improve trade 
infrastructure; reinforce Intellectual Property protection; 
and build the capacities of artists and cultural 
entrepreneurs to be competitive in international markets. 
These strategies should be fully integrated across 
institutions and tailored in particular to the needs of 
Least Developed Countries. 
 ¡ Developed and developing countries should invoke 
Article 16 of the 2005 Convention more frequently 
when negotiating bilateral and multilateral trade 
agreements, especially given the increasing importance 
of digital services trade. Developed countries, in 
particular, are encouraged to grant preferential 
treatment to facilitate market access for cultural goods 
and services from developing countries and to support 
cultural cooperation through co-production agreements, 
knowledge sharing and capacity-building efforts 
that improve export readiness. Preferential treatment 
under Article 16 should be non-reciprocal and include 
measures such as tariff exemptions and simplified 
trade procedures.
 ¡ To achieve more inclusive and diversified global trade 
of cultural goods and services, the export capacity 
and readiness of Least Developed Countries should be 
strengthened through support for capacity development, 
market access and trade facilitation across both supply 
and demand dimensions. This support should be long-
term and well-coordinated, with emphasis on improving 
digital infrastructure and comprehensive policies.
 ¡ To improve their trade position and competitiveness 
in global markets, developing countries’ cultural and 
creative industries need to move up the value chain 
by creating distinctive cultural goods and services, 
supported by Intellectual Property protection and 
strategic country or regional branding initiatives.
 ¡ Developing countries should increase investment in trade 
infrastructure and place greater emphasis on promoting 
and regulating the trade of digital cultural services. 
 ¡ Developing countries should consider attracting foreign 
direct investment in the cultural and creative sectors, 
ensuring complementary measures to strengthen 
local absorptive capacity, including human capital 
development and technology transfer. 
 ¡ Developed countries should strengthen their Aid for 
Trade programmes for cultural and creative industries 
and e-commerce, and focus on helping Least Developed 
Countries build their cultural export capacity and 
trade infrastructure. Aid for Trade should more strongly 
prioritize digital trade capacity, in alignment with 
Sustainable Development Goal 8.B. 
For governments and international 
organizations
 ¡ Promote international cooperation to support balanced 
and diversified trade in cultural goods and services. 
This includes helping under-represented countries build 
infrastructure, human capital and enabling policy 
frameworks. Cooperation should aim at reducing the 
digital divide and ensure inclusion in digital cultural 
services trade.
 ¡ Develop strategic partnerships with international 
organizations, such as the World Trade Organization, 
United Nations Trade and Development and the World 
Intellectual Property Organization, as well as the private 
sector. These partnerships can pool together valuable 
expertise for developing comprehensive trade strategies 
and strengthening national trade capacities.
 ¡ Improve information systems that track and evaluate the 
international exchange of cultural goods and services 
and collect measurable and comprehensive data, 
including official development assistance and foreign 
direct investment data. Parties to the Convention are 
encouraged to use the revised UNESCO Framework for 
Cultural Statistics for data collection, to support reliable 
monitoring. 
 ¡ Strengthen the export readiness of the creative sector 
by providing capacity building and e-commerce training. 
These programmes should equip artists and cultural 
entrepreneurs with skills to increase the marketability, 
visibility and competitiveness of their creative goods and 
services on the international market. Countries should 
also promote country-of-origin branding and leverage 
Intellectual Property to add value. 
 ¡ Support South-South cooperation through, for example, 
reciprocal trade agreements, scholarships, training and 
the sharing of market access opportunities.
 ¡ Strengthen intersectoral linkages between the creative 
and tourism sectors via festivals, book fairs, cultural 
markets and trade shows.
RECOMMENDATIONS
© Lana Sham/Shutterstock.com*
143
Chapter 7
Reinforcing the 
Convention’s influence 
in international fora
Véronique Guèvremont
© Lana Sham/Shutterstock.com*
144
 ¡ While Parties to the Convention are actively engaged 
in international AI fora through strategies, working 
groups and regulatory initiatives, the practical 
implementation of Article 21 on ‘International 
consultation and coordination’ remains limited. 
Major AI frameworks, including the OECD AI 
Principles and the Global Digital Compact, largely 
overlook cultural diversity, even though AI both 
relies on and shapes cultural expressions. A notable 
exception is the European Union Artificial Intelligence 
Act, which explicitly links transparency obligations to 
copyright protection and thereby integrates cultural 
considerations into AI regulation. 
 ¡ International fora and several recent legal instruments 
recognize the 2005 Convention as a key driver of 
sustainable and inclusive development, particularly 
in the context of a post-2030 development agenda. 
Article 21 is also recognized for helping integrate 
the Convention’s principles into trade, investment, 
Intellectual Property, telecommunications and human 
rights frameworks. 
 ¡ The Quadrennial Periodic Reports show that Article 16 
remains insufficiently understood and implemented, 
with developed countries deploying only limited 
efforts to ensure compliance with their commitment.
 ¡ The analysis of the implementation of the 2005 
Convention during the 2021-2024 period confirms the 
Convention’s continued impact on traditional areas 
of cultural trade and highlights emerging challenges 
linked to AI and digital governance.
 ¡ Only 3% of the 269 trade agreements concluded 
since the Convention’s adoption explicitly reference it, 
suggesting limited awareness among Parties and weak 
coordination between ministries of culture and trade. 
 ¡ Between 2021 and 2024, 22 trade or economic 
partnership agreements involving at least one Party 
to the Convention were concluded. Cultural provisions 
remain consistent with previous trends but introduce 
no new approaches despite recent developments in 
the digital environment.
 ¡ Of these 22 agreements, 13 include a chapter setting 
out commitments on digital trade and three introduce 
new types of commitments specifically addressing 
Artificial Intelligence.
 ¡ Between 2021 and 2024, six of the 50 Bilateral 
Investment Treaties – involving nine Parties to the 
Convention – include at least one cultural clause 
aligned with the Convention’s objectives. Although 
this figure represents an increase over previous years 
from 5% to 12%, the overall share remains low, 
indicating that few Parties consider the Convention’s 
principles when negotiating such treaties. This may 
limit their ability to protect and promote the diversity 
of cultural expressions. 
KEY FINDINGS
145
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
Only 3%
of trade agreements have explicitly 
referenced the Convention 
since its adoption, signalling weak 
coordination between ministries 
of culture and trade
Preferential 
treatment 
remains insufficiently 
understood and 
implemented by 
developed countries
Only 12%
of Bilateral Investment Treaties 
include cultural clauses aligned 
with the Convention’s objectives, 
up from 5% previously
AI and the digital environment are key issues among trade agreements and cooperation frameworks:
Of 22 agreements,  13 include a chapter on digital trade 
   3  introduce new commitments specifically related to AI
2,544 cultural clauses relevant 
to the Convention have been included in
194 bilateral and 
regional trade agreements 
since the Convention’s adoption
Countries incorporate 
references to the Convention 
in multilateral/regional/bilateral 
legal instruments, in various fields 
of cultural cooperation, trade, 
Intellectual Property, sustainable 
development and human rights
However, culture remains absent from major AI frameworks 
even though AI shapes and depends on cultural expressions
Respect each Party’s 
sovereign right to 
adopt and implement 
cultural policies
Include cultural 
diversity 
as an explicit 
objective
Reaffirm the Convention’s core objectives
 ¡ recognize the dual nature of cultural goods 
and services
 ¡ promote balanced cultural exchanges
When engaging in digital trade negotiations and AI cooperation frameworks: 
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
146
INTRODUCTION
The Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005 Convention) is 
the only binding international legal instrument entirely 
dedicated to the protection and promotion of the diversity 
of cultural expressions. At the same time, it forms part of 
a wider network of international legal instruments whose 
provisions can, directly or indirectly, shape the evolution of 
cultural expressions by ensuring their diversity is protected 
and promoted. For instance, its Article 21 ‘International 
consultation and coordination’ calls on the Parties to 
promote its objectives and principles in other international 
fora. By engaging in this way, countries can reinforce 
dialogue through partnerships, engage in innovative forms 
of cooperation and contribute to making cultural diversity a 
guiding value in global governance. 
Between 2005 and 2024, the implementation of Article 21 
resulted in the incorporation of explicit references to the 
2005 Convention – or to its objectives and principles – in 
the text of hundreds of multilateral, regional and bilateral 
legal instruments. These references have appeared in 
fields as varied as trade, investment, Intellectual Property, 
telecommunications, sustainable development and human 
rights, not to mention agreements aimed at supporting 
cultural cooperation at all levels and in all regions of the 
world. In some trade agreements, these references have also 
supported the implementation of Article 16 ‘Preferential 
treatment for developing countries’. The Convention has 
therefore continuously contributed to establishing the 
diversity of cultural expressions as a widely embraced value 
in the globalized world.
However, recent developments, particularly in the regulation 
of Artificial Intelligence (AI), pose new challenges for the 
promotion of the 2005 Convention’s principles. While some 
AI-related texts discussed in cultural fora address the impact 
of AI on cultural and creative industries, most international 
instruments in this area fail to consider its implications for 
cultural expressions. This reflects a limited implementation 
of Article 21 in many fora currently shaping AI governance.
Similar concerns arise in the commercial sphere. While 
new agreements continue to be negotiated by the Parties 
and commitments on digital trade are multiplying, explicit 
references to the 2005 Convention – or to its objectives and 
principles – remain scarce. More importantly, the Parties 
have not demonstrated a clear willingness to use these trade 
agreements as instruments for implementing Article 16, 
which applies to the commercial sphere, including in the 
digital environment. These observations highlight the need 
to reaffirm two of the Convention’s fundamental objectives: 
1) to recognize the specific nature of cultural goods and 
services, and 2) to achieve wider and more balanced cultural 
exchanges. These goals require a modulation of trade 
commitments so that Parties can preserve their sovereign 
right to maintain and adopt measures supporting the 
diversity of cultural expressions within their territories and at 
the international level.
The challenges identified in this chapter underline the 
importance of interministerial coordination to promote the 
Convention’s objectives whenever international rules may 
affect cultural expressions. This coordination is essential 
both to ensure policy consistency and to prevent unintended 
negative impacts on the cultural ecosystem from decisions 
taken in other sectors, such as trade or digital policies. This 
reflects the very intent of Article 21 of the 2005 Convention 
– and to some extent its Article 16 as well – which both 
impose an obligation of coherence on the Parties. This need 
for interministerial coordination was addressed in 2024 
by the two expert groups mandated by the Convention’s 
governing bodies to formulate recommendations: the 
Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural expressions 
in the digital environment and the Intergovernmental 
Reflection Group on the implementation of Article 16 on 
‘Preferential treatment for developing countries’. Some of 
the recommendations put forward by these two groups will 
therefore be discussed in this chapter.
A CERTAIN CONTINUITY IN THE 
CULTURAL CLAUSES INCORPORATED 
INTO TRADE AGREEMENTS
Between 2021 and 2024, 22 trade agreements involving 
at least one Party to the Convention were concluded 
(Table 7.1). This section examines these clauses, which reflect 
a certain continuity with previous documented periods. 
Most of the Parties bound by these trade agreements have 
indeed continued to promote the objectives and principles 
of the Convention by incorporating cultural clauses that 
reflect their intention to preserve their right to intervene in 
this sector. The legal techniques used to achieve this have 
remained largely unchanged. As documented in previous 
editions of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report, 
Parties continue to rely on general cultural exceptions or 
exemptions, as well as on reservations and limitations to 
specific commitments, to preserve their sovereign right to 
adopt and implement policies that protect and promote the 
diversity of cultural expressions. 
147
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
BOX 7.1 •  Main cultural clauses incorporated into trade agreements by Parties 
In order to protect and promote the diversity of cultural expressions within their territory, Parties may resort to policies 
aimed at supporting their cultural and creative industries, cultural goods and services, or artists and other cultural 
professionals. However, the right to implement such policies may be restricted by their trade agreements, in particular 
their commitment to non-discrimination. * In such cases, it may be necessary to incorporate cultural clauses whose effect 
would be to enable the implementation of cultural policies that support national or local cultural expressions (support 
that could be considered a form of ‘discrimination’). The 2005 Convention contextualizes the use of these clauses and 
why cultural goods and services should be treated differently within trade agreements by recognizing the dual nature, 
both economic and cultural, of cultural goods and services as well as their distinctive nature as vehicles of identity, 
values and meaning. 
The main cultural clauses used by the Parties are
 ¡ Explicit references to the 2005 Convention or to its objectives and principles: these references are included in 
the preamble to the trade agreement, or in certain specific chapters, and may influence the interpretation of the 
provisions of the trade agreement. Cultural diversity may also be explicitly mentioned as a legitimate public policy 
objective under provisions on the right to regulate.
 ¡ Cultural exemption or cultural exception clauses: general cultural exceptions or exemptions offer a wide protection 
of the sovereign right of countries to protect and promote the diversity of cultural expressions by preventing all 
commercial commitments from being applied to cultural goods and services; specific exceptions or exemptions 
may apply only to certain categories of commitments; recourse to these clauses may be unconditional or subject to 
compliance with certain conditions. 
 ¡ Reservations: this is a clause whereby a Party modifies the application of certain trade commitments with regard to 
certain cultural goods and/or services. The reservation may also be aimed at maintaining certain cultural policies in 
force or protecting a Party’s right to use certain of these policies in the future.
 ¡ Positive lists of commitments: this technique is used by Parties to commit to the progressive liberalization of their 
markets; it allows them to abstain from making commitments in sectors of their choice – which may include the 
cultural sector – or to attach various types of limitations to their commitments.
 ¡ Cultural cooperation commitments: some trade agreements contain cultural cooperation commitments that reflect 
the objectives and principles of the Convention; in a few agreements, these commitments are set out in a Protocol 
on Cultural Cooperation (PCC) annexed to the trade agreement (for example, the Economic Partnership Agreement 
between the CARIFORUM States and the European Community, to which a PCC is annexed).
For more details on these various categories of clauses, see Chapter 7 of the 2015 edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for 
Creativity report.
* In free trade agreements, non-discrimination is a fundamental principle that requires each Party to refrain from treating the goods, services or enterprises of another Party less 
favourably than its own or those of any third Party. This principle is embodied in two core rules: the ‘National Treatment’ and the ‘Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment’.
148
The period from 2021 to 2024 confirms continuity in the 
Parties’ practices, with no particularly innovative cultural 
clauses emerging in the trade agreements concluded during 
this time. As in previous years, general cultural exceptions 
or exemptions have remained a technique used by very few 
Parties, mainly Canada and New Zealand. The European 
Union, for its part, has continued to exclude the audio-visual 
sector from its commitments concerning trade in services, 
investments and digital trade – an exclusion that is essential 
for the implementation of policies promoting cultural goods 
and services produced within the European Union. The 
European Union’s Audiovisual Media Services Directive, 
which coordinates national legislation on audio-visual media, 
promotes the production and distribution of European works, 
including on digital platforms. In order for this legislation to 
be enforceable, the European Union has tailored its trade 
commitments and introduced cultural clauses that preserve 
the sovereign right of its Member States to intervene in this 
field. Finally, only two trade agreements signed during this 
period make explicit reference to the 2005 Convention: the 
New Zealand-United Kingdom and the European Union-
New Zealand Free Trade Agreements.
Over the 20 years of implementation (2005-2024), explicit 
references to the 2005 Convention in trade agreements 
have remained limited. This practice is mainly observed 
in agreements concluded by the European Union and, 
since Brexit, by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland (United Kingdom). In total, 20 such 
references appear in nine bilateral or regional agreements, 
and in some cases in their annexed Protocols on Cultural 
Cooperation, linking 51 Parties.1 With only 3% of the 
269 agreements concluded since 2005 containing an 
explicit reference, this proportion remains very low. This may 
reflect weak coordination between ministries of culture and 
trade, or more broadly, a lack of awareness among Parties 
of the importance of including an explicit reference to the 
2005 Convention in trade negotiations.
This finding must nonetheless be put into perspective, as the 
objectives and principles of the 2005 Convention may be 
reflected – albeit implicitly – in many other types of cultural 
clauses incorporated into bilateral and regional agreements. 
In fact, of the 269 bilateral and regional trade agreements 
adopted between 2005 and 2024, 194 agreements contain 
in total 2,544 cultural clauses relevant to the objectives and 
principles of the Convention. 
1 . Antigua and Barbuda, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, 
El Salvador, Estonia, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands (Kingdom of the), New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, 
Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago and the United Kingdom.
BOX 7.2 •  The recognition of the specific 
nature of culture in trade 
agreements
Of these 2,544 cultural clauses included in the 
194 bilateral and regional agreements between 2005 
and 2024, 202 are cultural exceptions or exemptions 
designed to exclude various categories of cultural goods 
and services from the scope of the agreement (for 
example, all cultural industries or services belonging to 
the audio-visual sector, or even specifically identified 
cultural goods and services).
In order to limit the scope of their trade commitments 
and protect their sovereign right to adopt cultural 
policies, the Parties also formulate hundreds of 
reservations. One hundred eight agreements contain 
over 1 ,200 reservations related to various types of 
cultural policies. Among these are 108 reservations 
allowing national content quotas to be maintained 
in the audio-visual sector. In the 2022 Australia-
India Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement, 
for example, Australia reserves its right to adopt or 
maintain any measure with respect to transmission 
quotas for local content, on free-to-air commercial 
television broadcasting services, radio broadcasting 
services, or other audio-visual services transmitted 
electronically, in order to make Australian audio-visual 
content reasonably available to Australian consumers.
There are also 100 reservations protecting the right 
of countries to adopt and implement measures 
relating to audio-visual co-production. For example, in 
the 2022 New Zealand-United Kingdom Free Trade 
Agreement, New Zealand reserves its right to adopt 
or maintain preferential co-production arrangements 
for film and television productions. In this reservation, 
New Zealand adds that official co-production status, 
which may be granted to a co-production produced 
under preferential co-production arrangements, 
confers national treatment on works covered by such 
arrangements.
Source: UNESCO Chair on the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, Université Laval
149
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
Table 7.1 •   Bilateral and regional trade agreements involving at least one Party to the Convention 
during the period 2021-2024
Trade agreements 
2021-2024
Date of 
signature Parties
Explicit reference 
to the Convention
General cultural 
exception/exemption 
Digital trade  
chapter
Specific references under 
the digital trade chapter
Non-
discrimination
Data flow
Source code
Data location 
facilities
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Digital 
inclusion
Cultural 
exception 
1 Comprehensive Economic 
Cooperation and Partnership 
Agreement (CECPA) between 
the Rep. of India and 
the Rep. of Mauritius 
22/02 
2021
India
Mauritius
✘ ✘ ✘
2 Partnership, Trade and 
Cooperation Agreement 
between the United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland and the Rep. of Albania
05/02 
2021
Albania 
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
✘ ✘ ✘ 
3 Partnership, Trade and 
Cooperation Agreement 
between the Government of 
the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland 
and the Government of the 
Rep. of Serbia
16/04 
2021
Serbia
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland ✘ ✘ ✘ 
4 Free Trade Agreement between 
Iceland, the Principality of 
Liechtenstein and the Kingdom 
of Norway and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
08/07 
2021
Iceland
Liechtenstein
Norway
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
✘ ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
5 Free Trade Agreement 
between the Government of 
the Kingdom of Cambodia 
and the Government of the 
Rep. of Korea
26/10 
2021
Cambodia
Rep. of Korea
✘ ✘ ✘ 
6 Free Trade Agreement between 
the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland 
and Australia
16/12 
2021
Australia
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
✘ ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
7 Digital Economy Agreement 
between the United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland and the Rep. of 
Singapore
25/02 
2022
Singapore
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
✘ ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
8 Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership Agreement between 
the Government of the Rep. of 
India and the Government of 
the United Arab Emirates
18/02 
2022
India
United Arab 
Emirates ✘ ✘ ✔ ✔
9 Free Trade Agreement between 
New Zealand and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
28/02 
2022
New Zealand
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
10 Australia-India Economic 
Cooperation and Trade 
Agreement
02/04 
2022
Australia
India ✘ ✘ ✘ 
150
11 Free Trade Agreement 
between the Government of 
the People’s Rep. of China 
and the Government of the 
Rep. of Nicaragua
31/08 
2023
China
Nicaragua
✘ ✘ ✔
12 European Union-New Zealand 
Free Trade Agreement
09/07 
2023
European Union
New Zealand ✔ ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
13 Free Trade Agreement between 
the Government of the State 
of Israel and the Government 
of the Rep. of Korea
12/05 
2021
Israel
Rep. of Korea ✘ ✘ ✔ ✔
14 Canada-Ukraine Free Trade 
Agreement (modernization of 
the 2016 agreement)
22/09 
2023
Canada
Ukraine ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
15 Free Trade Agreement 
between the Government of 
the People’s Rep. of China 
and the Government of the 
Rep. of Ecuador
10/05 
2023
China
Ecuador
✘ ✘ ✔
16 Free Trade Agreement 
between the Government of 
The People’s Rep. of China 
and the Government of the 
Rep. of Serbia
17/10 
2023
China
Serbia
✘ ✘ ✘ 
17 Free Trade Agreement 
between the EFTA States and 
the Rep. of Moldova 27/06 
2023
Iceland
Liechtenstein
Norway
Rep. of Moldova
Switzerland
✘ ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
18 European Union-Kenya 
Economic Partnership 
Agreement
18/12 
2023
European Union
Kenya N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
19 Trade and Economic Partnership 
Agreement between the EFTA 
States and the Rep. of India 10/03 
2024
Iceland
India
Liechtenstein
Norway
Switzerland
✘ ✘ ✘ 
20 Viet Nam-UAE Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership 
Agreement
28/10 
2024
Vietnam 
United Arab 
Emirates
✘ ✘ ✔ ✔
21 Australia-UAE Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership 
Agreement
06/1 1 
2024
Australia
United Arab 
Emirates
✘ ✘ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
22 European Union-Mercosur 
Association Agreement
06/12 
2024
Argentina
Brazil
European Union
Paraguay
Uruguay
✘ ✔ N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
✔ indicates that the corresponding section was included in the agreement.
✘ indicates that the corresponding section was not included in the agreement.
N/A indicates that the concerned text is not available and therefore could not be analysed.
151
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
CLAUSES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
AND ALGORITHMS 
Between 2021 and 2024, 13 out of 22 concluded trade 
agreements include a chapter on digital trade (Table 7.1). 
Only one of these 13 agreements contains a non-
discrimination commitment applicable to digital products, 
namely the Israel-Republic of Korea Free Trade Agreement. 
The other 12 agreements do not contain such a clause; 
it is crucial for the Parties not to agree to be bound by a 
non-discrimination commitment if they wish, for example, 
to implement measures to promote the visibility or 
discoverability of national and local content in the digital 
environment. Indeed, the absence of such a clause grants 
the Parties broader regulatory space in the adoption of 
cultural policies applicable to the digital environment. By 
comparison, a third of the agreements adopted from 2017 
to 2020 containing a chapter on digital trade include a 
non-discrimination commitment (UNESCO, 2022). Countries 
have therefore seemed more cautious or reluctant to commit 
to this type of commitment in recent years.
Another noteworthy element is the inclusion of a cultural 
exception in the digital trade chapter of several agreements, 
either general in scope or more specifically targeting certain 
sectors. Of the 13 agreements concluded during the covered 
period, six include such an exception. For example, the 
‘Digital Trade’ chapter of the Australia-United Kingdom 
Free Trade Agreement excludes audio-visual services 
(Article 14.2.2(a)). The same is true of the European Union-
New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (Article 12.1 .2(a)), which 
in addition contains a provision reaffirming ‘each Party’s 
right to regulate within their territories to achieve legitimate 
policy objectives, such as [...] the promotion and protection 
of cultural diversity’ (Article 12.3).
As mentioned in the 2022 edition of the Re|Shaping report, 
it is also imperative to closely examine the commitments 
related to cross-border data flows, access to source code and 
data location. While such commitments may have a positive 
impact on the cultural exchanges between Parties and 
facilitate access to a wide range of cultural expressions from 
different regions of the world, they may also – depending 
on their specific wording in trade agreements – have the 
effect of restricting the Parties’ ability to implement certain 
cultural policies applicable online, for instance to monitor 
the discoverability requirement fixed in national policies or 
regulations. 
BOX 7.3 •  Understanding Parties’ 
commitments for digital trade
Cross-border data flows refer to the movement of 
digital information across national borders, for example 
when a music streaming platform stores user data or 
delivers cultural content from servers located in another 
country. 
Source code refers to the human-readable instructions 
that determine how a computer program operates. 
Source code may cover algorithms, including 
recommendation systems that influence which films, 
songs or books are suggested to users on cultural 
content platforms. Access to source code can be applied 
as a condition for market access. 
Data location refers to measures that compel 
companies to conduct certain digital-related activities 
within a country’s borders, such as storing, processing 
or managing data locally. Such measures may include 
requirements for data servers to be located within the 
country, requirements for local content, government 
procurement preferences, and technology standards 
that favour local digital companies.
Some Parties appear to be exercising caution in this 
regard, seeking to preserve their right to pursue legitimate 
public policy objectives – which certainly include the 
protection of cultural diversity – despite accepting trade 
commitments. The European Union-New Zealand Free 
Trade Agreement (Article 12.1 1 .2) provides a relevant 
example: the provision on access to source code specifies 
that nothing shall prevent authorities from accessing 
source code for regulatory, enforcement or judicial 
purposes, or from protecting Intellectual Property rights. 
This illustrates how Parties can include provisions in 
their trade agreements that preserve their right to 
access source code in justified cases. For instance, policy 
requiring platforms to promote national content through 
recommendation algorithms may entail access to some 
information related to the source to verify compliance.
Finally, three agreements concluded during the reporting 
period include new commitments specifically related to AI. 
While they do not directly address the diversity of cultural 
expressions, they touch on closely related issues. Three 
illustrative provisions are presented below.
152
Digital Economy Agreement between the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the 
Republic of Singapore (2022)
Article 8.61-R 
3. The Parties shall endeavour, where appropriate, to 
cooperate on matters related to AI […]. Such cooperation 
may include: […] (b) cooperating on issues […] such as 
ethical use, human diversity and unintended biases, 
industry-led technical standards and algorithmic 
transparency; (c) promoting collaboration between each 
Party’s governmental and nongovernmental entities across 
research, academia, and industry, in relation to: […] (iv) 
responsible use and adoption of AI technologies; and 
(d) participating actively in international fora, such as 
the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence […].
Free Trade Agreement between New Zealand and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (2022)
Article 15.19
3. Each Party shall endeavour to develop governance and 
policy frameworks for the trusted, safe, and responsible 
use of emerging technologies. To this end, in developing 
those frameworks, the Parties recognise the importance of: 
(a) taking into account the principles and guidelines of 
relevant international bodies, such as the OECD and the 
Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence; […].
4. The Parties shall cooperate, as appropriate, on 
matters related to digital innovation and emerging 
technologies with respect to trade. This may include: […] 
(b) cooperating on developments relating to emerging 
technologies, including ethical use, industry-led standards, 
and algorithmic transparency, to address issues such 
as unintended biases and exacerbation of existing 
divides, by ensuring human diversity is recognised in 
the development of technologies; and (c) participating 
actively in international fora.
Australia-United Arab Emirates Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership Agreement (2024) 
Article 12.24
2. The Parties also recognise the importance of developing 
governance and regulatory frameworks for the trusted, 
safe and responsible use of AI technologies to realise the 
benefits of AI and mitigate risks. […]
3. To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to: 
(a) collaborate on and promote the development and 
adoption of frameworks that support the trusted, safe, 
and responsible use of AI technologies (‘ AI Governance 
Frameworks’), through relevant regional and international 
fora; and (b) take into consideration internationally 
recognised standards, principles or guidelines when 
developing such AI Governance Frameworks.
These AI-related commitments are relatively non-binding 
and are primarily aimed to encourage cooperation between 
the Parties. While they emphasize the responsible use of 
AI, two of the three provisions also mention ethics, human 
diversity, unintended bias and algorithmic transparency, 
areas that open the door to cultural considerations. 
However, while such an opening is a positive step, it is 
insufficient to entirely address the relevance, or even 
the necessity, for the Parties to the 2005 Convention 
to explicitly introduce the preservation of the diversity 
of cultural expressions as an objective of the desired 
cooperation in the field of AI.
A final important aspect of these commitments is their 
reference to regional and international fora working on 
AI standards and principles. These references could help 
align digital trade commitments with broader frameworks 
for the responsible use of AI, including the 2021 UNESCO 
Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, 
which addresses issues relevant to the diversity of 
cultural expressions. It is therefore up to the Parties to 
ensure that cooperation on AI also integrates cultural 
imperatives, such as respect for Intellectual Property 
and the safeguarding of human creativity, concerns also 
reflected in the recommendations of the Reflection Group 
on the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital 
environment. 
THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION JOINT 
STATEMENT INITIATIVE ON ELECTRONIC 
COMMERCE AND ITS POTENTIAL TO 
STIMULATE CULTURAL EXCHANGES
As the Convention celebrated its twentieth anniversary 
in 2025 and as its Parties work towards achieving 
its objectives in the digital environment, it may be 
worthwhile to take stock of the World Trade Organization’s 
(WTO) Work Programme on Electronic Commerce. 
Launched in 1998, the programme evolved at a variable 
pace over the course of its first two decades without any 
palpable effect at the multilateral level. Yet, a parallel 
Joint Statement Initiative on Electronic Commerce revived 
in 2017 the efforts to move towards an agreement in the 
area of digital trade. In this context, a new and crucial 
stage was reached on 26 July 2024 with the conclusion 
of the Agreement on Electronic Commerce.
The 2024 Communication on the Joint Statement 
Initiative on Electronic Commerce that led to this 
agreement (WTO, 2024) underscores the role of global 
electronic commerce and the opportunities it creates 
for inclusive trade and development. 
153
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
Although not yet adopted, the agreement marks a first 
step towards new plurilateral rules on digital trade under 
the WTO umbrella, with future negotiations expected 
on more sensitive issues, such as those around data. 
The current text nonetheless warrants examination, 
particularly in light of the 2017 Operational Guidelines 
on the implementation of the 2005 Convention in the 
digital environment.
The 2024 Agreement on Electronic Commerce focuses on 
digital trade facilitation, trust, transparency, cooperation 
and development. One of the most restrictive provisions, 
found in Article 1 1 .3, prohibits customs duties on electronic 
transmissions, thereby reducing the uncertainty linked to 
the moratorium on duties – a commitment by states not to 
impose them – which until now had to be renewed every 
two years. Other commitments – on electronic signatures, 
contracts, payments, interoperability, consumer protection, 
data privacy and cybersecurity – could have positive effects 
on the exchange of cultural goods and services in the digital 
environment. For instance, secure electronic transaction 
can help small cultural enterprises – such as independent 
music labels or publishers – confidently sell their products 
across borders. 
The agreement also promotes international cooperation 
to bridge the digital divide and foster an inclusive digital 
economy, aligning with the 2005 Convention’s Operational 
Guidelines. It also calls on the Parties to support 
developing countries in accessing digital ecosystems and 
infrastructure. Its implementation could thus help advance 
the Convention’s objectives in the digital environment.
The Parties to the Convention will nevertheless need to 
remain vigilant and closely follow the next stages of the 
negotiations on digital trade at the WTO, since the future 
adoption of a non-discrimination clause applicable to 
electronic commerce, as well as commitments related to 
data flows, source code, recommendation algorithms, or 
even AI could impact their right to implement certain 
cultural policies in the digital environment. The Parties will 
therefore benefit from promoting the ‘complementarity and 
coherency’ of their commitments in the areas of culture 
and trade (paragraph 19.1 of the 2005 Convention’s 
Operational Guidelines), which could be done through 
consultations, as suggested in Article 21 of the 
2005 Convention. 
CULTURAL CLAUSES IN BILATERAL 
INVESTMENT TREATIES
With regard to the Bilateral Investment Treaties concluded 
between 2021 and 2024, the database of UN Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD) lists 50 agreements (Table 7.2) 
involving at least one Party to the 2005 Convention, 
for a total of 37 Parties involved. However, of these 
50 Bilateral Investment Treaties, only six treaties, 
involving nine Parties to the Convention, contain at 
least one cultural clause that reflects its objectives and 
principles. The proportion of Bilateral Investment Treaties 
containing a relevant cultural clause during the period 
covered therefore stands at 12%, a higher proportion 
than the 5% observed in the previous edition of the 
Re|Shaping report.
Of the six relevant Bilateral Investment Treaties, five 
treaties – involving seven Parties to the Convention 
(Colombia, Georgia, Hungary, Indonesia, Spain, 
Switzerland and Turkmenistan) – contain a provision 
allowing signatories to reaffirm their right to regulate 
investment in their territory to achieve legitimate public 
policy objectives, such as the protection and promotion 
of diverse cultural expressions. One of these five treaties 
also contains an additional cultural clause that explicitly 
excludes from the concept of expropriation measures 
relating to the protection and promotion of the diversity 
of cultural expressions (Article 6.5 of the Agreement 
between Georgia and Hungary). 
The sixth Bilateral Investment Treaty containing a relevant 
cultural clause in light of the objectives and principles of 
the 2005 Convention is a treaty between Australia and 
the United Arab Emirates in which Australia reserves the 
right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect to 
the creative arts and other cultural and creative industries, 
including audio-visual services, entertainment services and 
libraries, as well as broadcasting (Annex VII – Schedule 
of Australia). This reservation also applies to the digital 
environment.
It is clear from this analysis that a very small proportion 
of Parties to the 2005 Convention take into account its 
objectives and principles when they negotiate a Bilateral 
Investment Treaty. These agreements could restrict their 
sovereign right to protect and promote the diversity of 
cultural expressions within their territory, for example 
through regulatory measures aimed at preserving media 
diversity – such as preventing the acquisition of national 
cultural industries by large foreign conglomerates – or 
promoting the creation, production and dissemination of 
national content. Parties should exercise increased vigilance 
in this area in the coming years. 
154
Table 7.2 •  Bilateral Investment Treaties involving at least one 
Party to the Convention during the period 2021-2024
Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) Date of 
signature
1 Bahrain* - Korea, Republic of, BIT (2024) 26/12/2024
2 China - Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of, BIT (2024) 15/1 1/2024
3 Congo - Türkiye BIT (2024) 13/1 1/2024
4 Australia - United Arab Emirates BIT (2024) 06/1 1/2024
5 Egypt - Saudi Arabia BIT (2024) 15/10/2024
6 India - Uzbekistan BIT (2024) 27/09/2024
7 Ghana - Trinidad and Tobago BIT (2024) 24/09/2024
8 Bahrain* - Hungary BIT (2024) 04/09/2024
9 Georgia - Hungary BIT (2024) 19/07/2024
10 China - Tajikistan BIT (2024) 05/07/2024
11 Tajikistan - Türkiye BIT (2024) 28/05/2024
12 Kazakhstan* - Kyrgyzstan* BIT (2024) 24/04/2024
13 Iraq - Türkiye BIT (2024) 22/04/2024
14 Cuba - Türkiye BIT (2024) 13/03/2024
15 Bahrain* - Hong Kong, China SAR, BIT (2024) 03/03/2024
16 India - United Arab Emirates BIT (2024) 13/02/2024
17 Belarus - Equatorial Guinea BIT (2023) 09/12/2023
18 Angola - China BIT (2023) 06/12/2023
19 Barbados - United Arab Emirates BIT (2023) 04/12/2023
20 Hong Kong, China SAR - Türkiye BIT (2023) 31/10/2023
21 Korea, Republic of - Serbia BIT (2023) 08/09/2023
22 Brazil - Sao Tome and Principe BIT (2023) 27/08/2023
23 Angola - Japan* BIT (2023) 09/08/2023
24 Türkiye - Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of, BIT (2023) 21/07/2023
25 Türkiye - United Arab Emirates BIT (2023) 19/07/2023
26 Hungary - Turkmenistan BIT (2023) 09/06/2023
27 Cabo Verde - Morocco BIT (2023) 09/05/2023
28 Colombia - Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of, BIT (2023) 03/02/2023
29 Belarus - Zimbabwe BIT (2023) 31/01/2023
30 Kazakhstan* - Qatar BIT (2022) 12/10/2022
31 Hungary - San Marino BIT (2022) 21/09/2022
32 Serbia - Türkiye BIT (2022) 07/09/2022
33 Georgia - Qatar BIT (2022) 21/06/2022
34 Philippines - United Arab Emirates BIT (2022) 09/06/2022
35 Indonesia - Switzerland BIT (2022) 24/05/2022
36 Türkiye - Uruguay BIT (2022) 23/04/2022
37 Angola - Cabo Verde BIT (2022) 14/03/2022
38 Mozambique - United Arab Emirates BIT (2022) 07/02/2022
39 Hungary - Oman BIT (2022) 02/02/2022
40 Côte d’Ivoire - United Arab Emirates BIT (2021) 24/1 1/2021
41 Jersey* - United Arab Emirates BIT (2021) 09/1 1/2021
42 Iraq - United Arab Emirates BIT (2021) 18/10/2021
43 Democratic Republic of the Congo - 
United Arab Emirates BIT (2021)
12/10/2021
44 Colombia - Spain BIT (2021) 16/09/2021
45 Democratic Republic of the Congo - Turkey BIT (2021) 07/09/2021
46 Angola - Turkey BIT (2021) 27/07/2021
47 Hungary - United Arab Emirates BIT (2021) 15/07/2021
48 Democratic Republic of the Congo - Rwanda BIT (2021) 26/06/2021
49 North Macedonia - United Arab Emirates BIT (2021) 22/02/2021
50 Georgia - Japan* BIT (2021) 29/01/2021
* Indicates that the country (or territory) is not Party to the 2005 Convention
REFERENCES TO THE 2005 CONVENTION 
IN OTHER AGREEMENTS, DECLARATIONS, 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND RESOLUTIONS
This section examines the legal instruments that address 
subjects other than trade and investment, considering 
not only the texts that explicitly refer to the Convention, 
but also those that incorporate its objectives and 
principles.
In this area, references to the 2005 Convention – or 
to its objectives and principles – have continued to 
multiply over the past four years. These references 
not only enhance the visibility of the Convention, but 
also contribute to the mutual reinforcement of actions 
undertaken by UNESCO and international bodies in 
areas such as cultural diversity, cultural and creative 
industries, the status of artists, cultural rights, and the 
role of culture in development processes.
Some legal texts highlight the growing attention that 
governments devote to the 2005 Convention when 
they engage in discussion within other international 
fora. This is particularly the case of the Resolution on 
the promotion of the enjoyment of the cultural rights of 
everyone and respect for cultural diversity, adopted by 
the Human Rights Council on 3 April 2023 (HRC, 2023). 
Other instruments go further, encouraging other countries 
to ratify the 2005 Convention. This is the case, for 
example, of the Salvador da Bahia Declaration of the 
G20 Ministers of Culture of 8 November 2024, which 
calls for the ratification and effective implementation of 
the Convention. References to the 2005 Convention are 
also intended to encourage countries to step up their 
actions in accordance with this treaty, as reflected in the 
Villers-Cotterêt Declaration of 5 October 2024 and the 
Résolution sur la promotion et l’usage du français au sein 
de l’espace francophone (Resolution on the Promotion 
and Use of the French Language within the Francophone 
Space) of the Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie 
(Parliamentary Assembly of the Francophonie) of 
8 July 2023. In addition to the incorporation of explicit 
references to the 2005 Convention in legal instruments, 
mutual reinforcement is also achieved through the 
introduction of references to it in strategies, action plans, 
work programmes or other texts, such as those listed 
in Table 7.3.
155
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
Table 7.3 •  References to the Convention in strategies, action plans and other international texts (selected examples)
Body Year Title
African Union, 43rd Ordinary Session of the 
Executive Council (Nairobi, Kenya) 2023 Plan of Action on Cultural and Creative Industries
Council of the European Union 2023 Council Conclusions on At-Risk and Displaced Artists
XXVIII Cumbre Iberoamericana de Jefas y Jefes 
de Estado y de Gobierno (28th Ibero-American 
Summit of Heads of State and Government)
2023 III Ibero-American Cooperation Quadrennial Action Plan 2023-2026
International Labour Organization and UNESCO 2023 Methodological Guide for the Participatory Development of a Law on the 
Status of the Artist
International Labour Organization 2023 Promoting Decent Work in the African Cultural and Creative Economy
Council of the European Union 2022 Council Resolution on the European Union Work Plan for Culture 
2023-2026 (2022/C 466/01)
Pacific Community 2022 Pacific Regional Culture Strategy 2022-2032: The Pacific Culture Decade 
Towards Sustainable Cultural Development
Secretaría General Iberoamericana 
(Ibero-American General Secretariat) 2022 Estrategia Iberoamericana de Cultura y Desarrollo Sostenible 
(Ibero-American Strategy for Culture and Sustainable Development) 
European Parliament and Council 
of the European Union 2021
Regulation (EU) 2021/818 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 20 May 2021 establishing the Creative Europe Programme 
(2021 to 2027) and repealing Regulation (EU) No 1295/2013
References to the 2005 Convention are also included in 
legal instruments that recognize the link between culture 
and sustainable development, or that advocate for the 
recognition of this link. The resolutions on culture and 
sustainable development of the United Nations General 
Assembly of 19 December 2023 (UNGA, 2023) and 
17 December 2021 (UNGA, 2021) rely in particular on 
the 2005 Convention to reaffirm the role of culture as 
a driver of sustainable development. In some cases, the 
instruments call for the recognition of culture in the 
post-2030 sustainable development agenda. The G20 
New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration of 2023, the G20 Bali 
Leaders’ Declaration of 2022, and the Declaration of the 
Meeting of Ministers of Culture of the G-77 and China 
‘Culture for Sustainable Development’ of 2023 are three 
examples of legal instruments that call for this recognition, 
drawing on the relevant UNESCO legal instruments. The 
#Culture2030Goal campaign – which involves Arterial 
Network, Culture Action Europe, the International Council 
on Monuments and Sites, International Federation of 
Coalitions for Cultural Diversity, International Federation of 
Library Associations and Institutions, International Music 
Council, and United Cities and Local Governments – also 
refers to the 2005 Convention. 
Assuming its leading role, UNESCO has taken every 
opportunity to advocate for the recognition of culture as 
a key driver of sustainable and inclusive development, 
particularly in the context of ongoing negotiations 
for the post-2030 international development agenda. 
The Outcome Document of the World Conference on Cultural 
Policies and Sustainable Development – MONDIACULT 2025, 
together with the MONDIACULT 2022 Declaration, offers 
additional anchorage for Parties and other stakeholders 
to advocate for the full integration of culture into building 
peaceful societies and sustainable development. Alongside 
this edition of the Re|Shaping report, the Global Report on 
Cultural Policies, Culture: the Missing SDG, launched at the 
MONDIACULT 2025 Conference, also reinforces the sense of 
urgency and plays a crucial role in supporting this effort.
Lastly, references to the 2005 Convention appear in several 
instruments addressing cultural or linguistic diversity in 
the digital environment. The 2023 G20 Culture Ministers’ 
Declaration (G20, 2023) calls for adapting cultural policies 
and legal frameworks to encompass digital technologies, 
drawing on the Convention and its relevant Operational 
Guidelines. The Djerba Declaration, adopted at the 18th 
Francophonie Summit, also refers to the 2005 Convention 
to encourage collaboration between the actors of the 
Francophonie and those of the digital world. Other 
references – either to the Convention or more generally 
to relevant UNESCO legal instruments – are found in the 
2022 United Nations General Assembly resolution on 
multilingualism (UNGA, 2022); the 2022 conclusion of the 
Council of the European Union on reinforcing intercultural 
exchanges through the mobility of artists and cultural and 
creative professionals, and through multilingualism in the 
digital era (Council of the European Union, 2022); and the 
2021 G20 Rome Declaration of Ministers of Culture.
156
However, focusing solely on texts that refer to the 
2005 Convention, or to its objectives and principles, offers 
only a partial view of the normative landscape that must 
be examined to assess the international influence of the 
Convention. A critical analysis of its influence must also 
consider agreements, declarations, recommendations and 
resolutions that remain silent on the Convention, even 
when they address issues relevant to the diversity of cultural 
expressions. This is especially true of recent normative 
instruments on AI, or more generally on digital technologies, 
adopted over the past four years.
LITTLE CONSIDERATION OF THE 
DIVERSITY OF CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS 
IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE INITIATIVES
A growing number of international organizations – 
including the United Nations, the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the 
World Intellectual Property Organization, UNCTAD, the 
International Organisation of La Francophonie, the G7 , 
the G20, the G-77 , the International Telecommunication 
Union, and the International Labour Organization – are 
addressing AI through strategies, working groups and 
legal instruments regulating its development and use. 
Since Parties to the Convention also participate in these 
fora and have shown interest in the impact of AI on 
cultural and creative industries (notably through the 
mandate given to the Reflection Group on the diversity 
of cultural expressions in the digital environment), 
the implementation of Article 21 should lead them 
to actively promote the objectives and principles of 
the 2005 Convention in these other fora. However, 
examination of the relevant instruments raises some 
concerning observations in this regard.
The Global Digital Compact, annexed to the Pact for the 
Future adopted in September 2024, is an example of the 
limited implementation of Article 21 . While it mentions 
linguistic and cultural diversity (for instance, Articles 8(g) 
and 59), it overlooks the need to protect the diversity of 
cultural expressions. This omission is striking given that 
cultural content is key training ‘material’ for Generative AI 
(GenAI). Copyright issues, central to fair remuneration, are 
barely touched upon (for instance, Article 39(c)). 
Another example concerns the OECD AI Principles, initially 
adopted in 2019 and revised in May 2024. The principles 
contain no mention of cultural diversity or cultural 
expressions. Only the principle of ‘Respect for the rule 
of law, human rights and democratic values, including 
fairness and privacy’ refers to ‘diversity’ as one of the 
values to be respected (Article IV.1 .2.a). As for the principle 
of ‘Transparency and explainability’, which is fundamental 
to the protection of copyright, it does not address 
Intellectual Property issues (Article IV.1 .3.iii).
It is at the level of the European Union that the most 
explicit link is established between the regulation of 
AI systems, the principle of transparency and respect 
for copyright. The European Union’s AI Act (European 
Parliament and Council of the European Union, 2024) 
imposes a transparency obligation on providers of AI 
models, requiring them in particular to ‘put in place a 
policy to comply with Union law on copyright and related 
rights’ (Article 53.1(c)) and to ‘draw up and make publicly 
available a sufficiently detailed summary about the 
content used for training of the general-purpose AI model’ 
(Article 53.1(d)). This transparency obligation therefore 
explicitly applies to content protected by copyright. Above 
all, it ‘should also lead to addressing the issue of the 
representativeness of data (training bias that can, among 
other things, generate and amplify discrimination) and that 
of the diversity of cultural expressions’ (Bensamoun, 2024).
In comparison with the European Union AI Act, the Council 
of Europe Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence 
and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law may 
appear less ambitious, partly because it makes no explicit 
reference to cultural diversity and copyright. Nevertheless, 
it sets out a general obligation of ‘protection of human 
rights’ (Article 4), which include cultural rights, and in 
particular the right ‘to benefit from the protection of the 
moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, 
literary or artistic production’ (Article 15.1(c), International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). The 
Framework Convention also promotes principles such as 
transparency, which could benefit cultural expressions, for 
instance through the identification of AI-generated content 
(Article 8). However, it does not directly address issues 
specific to the diversity of cultural expressions.
These examples should alert Parties: AI regulatory 
frameworks are advancing without adequately taking 
into account the need to protect the diversity of cultural 
expressions or recognizing the specific nature of cultural 
goods and services. Yet, such protection and recognition 
are essential to ensure that emerging principles and 
obligations support human creativity and cultural diversity. 
This highlights the urgency of raising awareness among 
the Parties, as underlined in the recommendations of the 
Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural expressions in 
the digital environment.
157
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
SHOULD ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
STANDARDS BE DEVELOPED 
SPECIFICALLY FOR THE CULTURAL 
AND CREATIVE SECTOR?
This question is central to the future implementation of 
the 2005 Convention. The Reflection Group addressed 
it in its Recommendation 1 , calling for the adoption of 
an Additional Protocol to the Convention ‘to enrich and 
complement the standards for protecting and promoting the 
diversity of cultural expressions in the digital environment 
through the adoption of a new legally binding instrument’ 
(UNESCO, 2024). While the ten other recommendations 
formulated by the Group were adopted at the tenth session 
of the Conference of Parties to the 2005 Convention in 
June 2025, the decision on Recommendation 1 was deferred 
to the eleventh session of the Conference of Parties in 2027 , 
to allow Parties to further assess the advisability of adopting 
such a protocol and to consider alternative legal options. If 
such a protocol were developed within UNESCO, it could fill 
the legal gap left by current AI frameworks, which generally 
remain silent on issues of the diversity of cultural expressions 
and copyright, despite the foundational role of cultural 
expressions in training GenAI systems. 
The adoption of an Additional Protocol – or any other 
initiative aimed at improving the implementation of the 
2005 Convention in the digital environment – should 
not, however, exempt the Parties to the Convention from 
implementing Article 21 in all fora where the regulation 
of AI is being discussed. To this end, the Reflection Group 
also recommended the creation of a consultation and 
dialogue framework to discuss the challenges posed by 
digital technologies and AI (Recommendation 4), and 
urged UNESCO to reinforce its action on AI and culture 
through enhanced cooperation with relevant international 
organizations and active participation in key global fora 
(Recommendation 1 1).
The Paris Artificial Intelligence Action Summit, held in 
February 2025, illustrates how the diversity of cultural 
expressions can be overlooked in AI fora. While its 
goal was to promote ‘an international AI governance 
structure [...] that combines the many challenges linked 
to this technology’ (Élysée, 2025a), the final Statement 
on Inclusive and Sustainable Artificial Intelligence for 
People and the Planet (Élysée, 2025b) makes no mention 
of cultural diversity and omits respect for Intellectual 
Property rights among its five priorities. The G7 Leaders’ 
Statement on AI for Prosperity is more explicit about 
Intellectual Property rights and acknowledges the ‘impact 
of AI for the cultural and creative sectors’. Yet, it contains 
no specific commitment in this regard. The time has 
come for the Parties to the 2005 Convention to act, 
with civil society mobilization playing a key role in 
advancing this agenda. The implementation of the Fair 
Culture Charter, launched in September 2024, could be 
a way to encourage such mobilization. 
BOX 7.4 • The Fair Culture Charter: a good 
practice for considering the relationship 
between culture, artists and AI
The Fair Culture Charter was adopted by an 
international consortium of partners at the end of a 
global participatory co-design process coordinated by 
the German Commission for UNESCO. The Charter sets 
out eight principles intended to promote a sustainable, 
fair and respectful environment for artists, creatives 
and other cultural workers. Principle 6, ‘Digital 
equity and ethics’, deals with AI and the diversity of 
cultural expressions. According to this principle: ‘The 
use of digital technologies in cultural and creative 
industries should always be designed to enrich the 
diversity of cultural expressions and to enhance human 
creativity, not replace it. This applies to all stages from 
creation, production, post-production all the way to 
dissemination of content and access. It particularly 
applies to development and application of AI systems, 
be it generative AI or the application of AI in (post-) 
production, curation, discoverability and algorithmic 
distribution’. Principle 6 also contains an explicit 
reference to the 2021 UNESCO Recommendation on the 
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. It further calls for the use 
of digital technologies, including AI, to be aligned with 
human rights and based on transparency, accountability 
and explainability, as well as on the protection of 
Intellectual Property rights and fair remuneration.
Source: German Commission for UNESCO, 2024
REFERENCES TO THE CONVENTION 
IN CASE-LAW BROUGHT BEFORE 
INTERNATIONAL, REGIONAL OR 
BILATERAL ADJUDICATION 
Since its adoption in 2005, the Convention has also been 
used to defend cultural policies challenged before various 
international adjudication mechanisms that resolve disputes 
and interpret applicable laws, and the previous editions of the 
Re|Shaping report have presented some of the most relevant 
cases. During the 2021-2024 period, however, very few new 
cases explicitly referring to the 2005 Convention were recorded. 
158
It is difficult to explain why this is the case. Could it be that 
cultural policies have been less contested, and if so, might 
this be seen as a positive impact of the Convention? Or is it 
because the Parties involved did not automatically rely on 
the Convention?
The second hypothesis applies specifically to the European 
context, in particular to cases related to state aid in the 
cultural sector examined by the European Commission. The 
Commission’s role is to ensure that such aid does not distort 
competition in the internal market and is compatible with 
objectives of common interest, such as the promotion of 
culture (Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, 
Article 107.3(d)). A significant number of state aid cases 
related to the cultural sector have been brought before 
the European Commission since 2021 , but the contested 
aid has generally not been defended by relying on the 
2005 Convention. Several cases testify to this, including the 
examination of aid concerning a Croatian book publishing 
programme (State Aid SA.102488 Croatia), an audio-visual 
tax credit in France (State Aid SA.63595 France), aid for 
local weekly newspapers in Denmark (State Aid SA.63029 
Denmark) and the establishment of a selective aid fund for 
video game creation (SA.60845 France). In only one case – 
State Aid SA.109768 (Malta, June 2024) – did the European 
Commission explicitly refer to the 2005 Convention. It 
deemed the measure compatible with the principles of the 
internal market, noting that it reflects cultural diversity in 
line with the values of freedom of expression, creativity and 
democratic citizenship set out in the Convention.
Neither in international economic law nor within regional 
or bilateral trade-dispute-settlement mechanisms has any 
cultural policy been challenged. However, some are being 
challenged at the national level, which could subsequently 
lead to complaints being filed before bilateral, regional or 
multilateral bodies. For example, in 2024, legal action was 
initiated by Netflix and Disney, challenging the Audio-Visual 
Media Services decree of the Wallonia-Brussels Federation 
before the Belgian Constitutional Court. In this case, Belgian 
cultural organizations invoked the 2005 Convention to defend 
the cultural objective of the measure and the sovereign right 
of states to protect and promote the diversity of cultural 
expressions. This dispute could lead to a referral to the Court 
of Justice of the European Union, raising the question of 
whether the Court will take the Convention into consideration. 
Parties facing similar disputes – whether at the national level 
or within dispute-settlement mechanisms established under 
international agreements, such as free trade agreements –
should invoke the 2005 Convention to defend the contested 
measures. As stated in Article 20 of the Convention, ‘when 
interpreting and applying the other treaties to which 
they are parties or when entering into other international 
obligations, Parties shall take into account the relevant 
provisions of this Convention’.
PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT 
FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
In the 2022 edition of the Re|Shaping report, analysis of 
the Quadrennial Periodic Reports led to the conclusion 
that Article 16 on preferential treatment remained a 
provision that was poorly implemented by the Parties to the 
Convention. Four years later, the situation has changed little. 
These reports show that confusion continues to surround 
the concept of preferential treatment and the nature of the 
commitment arising from Article 16, the implementation 
of which requires concrete action on the part of developed 
countries, namely the deployment of measures that meet 
five conditions. Chapter 5 of this report further examines 
the implementation of Article 16 in relation to the mobility 
of artists, while Chapter 6 addresses its implications for 
the trade of cultural goods and services, both highlighting 
persistent gaps in Parties’ understanding and application.
The implementation of Article 16 has thus been identified 
as a priority by the 2005 Convention’s governing bodies, 
and significant initiatives have been deployed over the 
past two years. In particular, UNESCO organized eight 
online training sessions between October 2023 and 
May 2024, which were attended by 140 participants from 
75 Parties to the Convention. Moreover, at the request 
of the Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, an 
Intergovernmental Reflection Group on the implementation 
of Article 16 was established, which presented its 
recommendations in 2024. 
BOX 7.5 • The five conditions a measure 
must meet in order to qualify as preferential 
treatment under Article 16 of the Convention:
1. be offered by a developed country;
2. benefit one or more developing countries;
3. facilitate cultural exchanges;
4. relate to cultural goods or services, or benefit artists 
or other cultural professionals or practitioners, from 
these developing countries;
5. not require reciprocity. 
‘Cultural exchange’ refers to cross-border movement. 
In light of the objectives of the 2005 Convention, in 
particular the goal of achieving more balanced cultural 
exchanges, cross-border movement here refers to the 
circulation both of cultural goods and services and of 
artists, cultural professionals, and cultural practitioners 
from developing countries to developed countries.
159
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
BOX 7.6 •  Five recommendations to improve 
the implementation of Article 16
The work carried out by the Intergovernmental 
Reflection Group, made up of 18 experts appointed by 
UNESCO’s six electoral groups, led to the formulation of 
five recommendations aimed at: improving monitoring 
and information collection on the implementation of 
Article 16 (Recommendation 1), centralizing and making 
information more easily accessible (Recommendation 2), 
strengthening the capacities of the Parties through 
educational tools and technical assistance 
(Recommendation 3), promoting good practices 
(Recommendation 4), and strengthening interministerial 
coordination and international collaboration 
(Recommendation 5). These recommendations were 
adopted by the Intergovernmental Committee for the 
Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions at its 18th session in February 2025. A 
plan for the implementation of these recommendations 
was also adopted by the Conference of Parties to the 
2005 Convention at its tenth session in June 2025.
For the time being, it must be noted that the reports 
submitted from 2021 to 2024 offer few relevant 
examples of measures that meet the five conditions 
under the provision of Article 16 (some of which are 
presented in Chapter 6). This attests to the scale of the 
challenges that still need to be addressed to facilitate 
cultural exchange and market access for developing 
countries, challenges that are closely tied to the 
global protection and promotion of diverse cultural 
expressions.
BOX 7.7 •  Financial support for cultural events involving international artists: 
a good practice implementing Article 16
Creative Australia (formerly Australia Council) offers financial support to festivals, exhibitions and other cultural events that 
invite international artists to Australia. Between 2018 and 2021 , the Australia Council’s International Leadership Program 
supported some 40 international participants from nine countries in the Indo-Pacific region (China, Fiji, India, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Samoa and Viet Nam) as part of a 12-month professional development 
programme that involves engaging with Australian artists, organizations and arts workers. For the artists and other cultural 
practitioners who participated, this initiative contributed to strengthening their leadership while enabling them to develop 
their networks. 
Participants across the range of the Leadership Programs form an alumni network made up of over 300 national and 
international leaders, including those from the Indo-Pacific who participated in the International Leadership Program supported 
by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade between 2018 and 2023. Although the programme is no longer offered in this 
format, Creative Australia continues to run leadership initiatives such as the Creative Leadership Program 2024-2025.
Source: Australia QPR, 2021; Creative Australia
Some of the Quadrennial Periodic Reports mention 
co-production agreements concluded by the Parties, 
such as the Agreement between the Government of 
the Republic of South Africa and the Government of 
the Republic of France on Cinematographic and Audio-
Visual Co-Production, or the Audiovisual Co-Production 
Agreement between the Flemish Community and the 
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Such measures may 
contribute to the implementation of Article 16, for 
example by providing funding opportunities to producers 
from developing countries and by facilitating the access 
of co-produced works to markets in developed countries. 
However, it should also be noted that some developing 
countries that are Parties to the 2005 Convention have 
presented in their periodic reports co-production agreements 
concluded with other developing countries (for more, see 
Chapter 6). Examples include agreements between South 
Africa and Kenya, South Africa and Nigeria, and Gambia 
and Senegal. Although this cooperation between developing 
countries is encouraged by the 2005 Convention’s 
Operational Guidelines on Article 16, it does not constitute a 
form of preferential treatment covered by this commitment.
Significant progress also remains to be made in granting 
preferential treatment through free trade agreements 
between developed and developing countries that are 
Parties to the 2005 Convention. In particular, further 
efforts are expected regarding the granting of preferential 
treatment to stimulate balanced cultural trade in the 
digital environment. For example, measures to increase 
the discoverability of cultural expressions from developing 
countries could constitute a form of preferential treatment 
and could be incorporated into the digital trade chapter of 
a free trade agreement.
160
It would therefore be desirable for the Parties to step up 
their efforts – not only at UNESCO, but also in other fora 
– to further the implementation of Article 16, particularly 
through trade agreements. Articles 16 and 21 complement 
each other in this respect, reminding the Parties to the 
2005 Convention of their commitment to promote the 
objectives and principles of the Convention in these 
other fora. A relevant example is the Salvador da Bahia 
Declaration of the G20 Ministers of Culture, adopted 
on 8 November 2024. In this declaration, the states 
emphasize the importance of enhancing the exchange of 
cultural goods and services and improving the mobility of 
artists and cultural professionals, taking into account the 
2005 Convention and its Article 16. UNESCO supported 
this initiative as a privileged partner in the multilateral 
discussions leading to the declaration and welcomed the 
G20 commitment, in line with its own recommendations, 
to strengthen investment in cultural policies. In contrast, 
the Samoa Agreement signed on 15 November 2023, 
by the European Union and the Organization of African, 
Caribbean and Pacific States, does not explicitly rely on 
Article 16. However, ‘[t]he Parties shall promote sustainable 
development through strengthened cultural exchanges, 
the promotion of co-productions, joint cultural and creative 
initiatives, and enhanced mobility of cultural and creative 
professionals’ (Article 22.2). And most importantly, the 
agreement mentions that the Parties ‘shall support the 
circulation of works of art in full observance of established 
international conventions’ (EU and OACPS, 2023).
Finally, it should be noted that good practices for 
implementing Article 16 can also be encouraged by 
initiatives led by developing countries. In this regard, 
mention should be made of the Assessment of the 
Legislative Framework for Cultural and Creative Industries 
carried out in 2024 by the Indian Ocean Commission. In 
this document, the Commission emphasizes that Article 16 
is not widely implemented in trade agreements and other 
international instruments, and calls on member countries 
to make greater use of this clause. The Assessment also 
includes a series of recommendations, one of which is 
to ‘organize tailored training for trade officials, focusing 
on the commercial aspect of preferential treatment for 
cultural goods and services, in the context of Article 16 
of the Convention’, with the support of UNESCO. Such 
a proactive approach on the part of developing countries 
that are Parties to the 2005 Convention can only have 
positive effects on the implementation of Article 16 in 
the coming years.
161
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora
For Parties to the Convention 
 ¡ Ensure that every new legal instrument – whether in 
cultural cooperation, trade, investment, Intellectual 
Property, telecommunications, sustainable 
development or human rights – explicitly references 
the 2005 Convention wherever relevant. 
 ¡ Institutionalize interministerial coordination 
mechanisms between culture, trade, and other relevant 
ministries to ensure policy coherence and consistent 
implementation of the Convention’s objectives, as 
foreseen in Articles 21 (‘International consultation 
and coordination’) and 16 (‘Preferential treatment 
for developing countries’). Such coordination should 
promote complementarity and coherence between 
cultural and trade commitments through systematic 
consultation during the preparation and negotiation 
of international legal instruments, such as trade 
agreements and Bilateral Investment Treaties, so 
that cultural considerations are integrated while 
safeguarding each Party’s sovereign right to maintain 
and adopt policies and measures for the protection 
and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions.
 ¡ Ensure that digital trade commitments in bilateral 
and regional agreements remain consistent with 
the Convention’s principles. This may require the 
incorporation of cultural exception or exemption 
clauses, the renunciation of non-discrimination 
commitments, and the introduction of references 
to the diversity of cultural expressions, including in 
cooperation provisions related to AI.
 ¡ At the negotiation stage, thoroughly review digital 
trade provisions – particularly those related to cross-
border data flows, access to source code and data 
location – to safeguard regulatory space for policies 
applicable to the digital environment, including 
measures that promote the discoverability of local 
and national content. 
 ¡ Closely monitor the ongoing negotiations on electronic 
commerce at the World Trade Organization to ensure 
that new commitments regarding non-discrimination, 
data flows, source code, recommendation algorithms 
and AI fully respect each Party’s sovereign right to 
adopt and implement cultural policies in the digital 
environment. In parallel, reaffirm the Convention’s 
core objectives – recognizing the dual nature of 
cultural goods and services, and promoting balanced 
cultural exchanges – when engaging in digital trade 
negotiations that may affect cultural diversity.
 ¡ Given the impact of AI on the diversity of cultural 
expressions, implement Article 21 and promote 
the Convention’s objectives and principles 
in fora developing AI governance frameworks. 
Parties should also take into account the 
2021 UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of 
Artificial Intelligence.
 ¡ Include cultural diversity as an explicit objective in AI 
cooperation frameworks and ensure that international 
standards uphold Intellectual Property rights and 
protect human creativity, in line with UNESCO 
standards.
 ¡ In any legal or trade disputes touching on cultural 
policies, invoke Article 20 of the Convention so that 
its principles are duly considered when interpreting or 
applying other international obligations. 
 ¡ Developed countries should intensify efforts, both 
within UNESCO and other fora, to implement Article 16 
by providing effective preferential treatment to cultural 
goods and services, as well as to artists and cultural 
professionals, from developing countries. For instance, 
measures promoting the discoverability of cultural 
expressions from developing countries could be included 
in cooperation frameworks or trade agreements, 
including for digital trade.
For Parties to the Convention and UNESCO 
 ¡ Explore the feasibility of developing an Additional 
Protocol to the Convention to strengthen the protection 
and promotion of cultural diversity in the digital 
environment, especially in response to the growing 
use of AI in the cultural and creative sector.
 ¡ Establish structured dialogue and cooperation 
frameworks between Parties and UNESCO to address 
emerging challenges linked to AI and digital 
technologies and to facilitate the exchange of 
information, good practices and capacity building. 
 ¡ Strengthen monitoring systems, capacity-building 
initiatives and the sharing of good practices to ensure 
that preferential treatment mechanisms are clearly 
understood and effectively implemented. 
RECOMMENDATIONS

INTEGRATE CULTURE 
IN SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
FRAMEWORKS 
Goal 3
© Shinji Turner-Yamamoto, Global Tree Project: 
HANGING GARDEN, 2010*
© Ben Young, Longing*
165
Chapter 8
Mind the gap: 
culture and sustainable 
development
Leandro Valiati
© Ben Young, Longing*
166
 ¡ Culture-led regeneration initiatives continue to expand 
at the local level. A growing share of Parties (85%, up 
from 73%) report culture-based regeneration initiatives 
at the regional, urban or rural level, highlighting local 
authorities as strategic partners. Growth has been 
strongest in the Arab States (up 36 percentage points) 
and Eastern Europe (up 25 points), both reaching 
100%, while Western Europe and North America 
recorded a slight decline of 5 percentage points. 
 ¡ Significant disparities persist in access to cultural 
infrastructure. Data on 28,000 geo-coded cultural 
facilities in 244 cities across 105 countries reveal 
inequalities between developed and developing 
countries. Access to cultural facilities remains 
particularly limited in low-income areas.
 ¡ Policies promoting cultural participation rose to 87%, 
up from 81%, reflecting recognition of culture’s role in 
social cohesion. While developed countries continue 
to lead (93%), developing countries are closing the 
gap (rising from 76% to 84%). Reported measures 
highlight efforts to foster inclusion, particularly for 
youth, older adults and migrants.
 ¡ Integration of culture into development cooperation 
strategies is increasing, but funding remains 
limited. The share of Parties integrating culture into 
development cooperation rose to 58%, up from 49%, 
driven by developed countries (up 21 percentage 
points). The strongest regional increases occurred in 
Eastern Europe (from 14% to 41%) and Africa (from 
39% to 62%). Despite this progress, overall funding 
remains modest: in 2022, only US$231 million (0.15%) 
of Country Programmable Aid went to culture and 
recreation. 
 ¡ The International Fund for Cultural Diversity, a multi-
donor fund, is strategically positioned to support 
sustainable development initiatives aligned with 
national and global priorities. However, available 
resources continue to fall short of demand.
 ¡ International and regional development banks, 
particularly in Africa, are emerging as key investors 
in creative economies, signalling new opportunities 
for scaling cultural impact.
 ¡ Nearly all Parties (93%) have involved public cultural 
bodies and agencies responsible for culture in national 
development and sustainable development planning in 
2021-2024. This share represents a significant increase 
from 76% in 2017-2020. The most significant increases 
occurred in Western Europe and North America (from 
68% to 100%) and Africa (from 65% to 97%).
 ¡ Cultural and creative industries are gaining 
recognition as drivers of sustainable development. 
A large majority of Parties (85%) identify the sector 
as strategic within national development plans (NDPs) 
and national sustainable development plans (NSDPs), 
up from 63% in the previous reporting cycle. Progress 
has been particularly strong in developing countries, 
while developed countries have also reported notable 
gains (74%). 
 ¡ While 77% of Parties now reference culture in their 
NDPs and NSDPs, only 56% set specific cultural 
goals – up from 44% in the last reporting period. The 
increase in setting specific goals has been largely 
driven by developing countries (from 40% to 59%). 
However, monitoring remains limited: only 25% of 
the measures integrating culture into sustainable 
development frameworks have been evaluated, 
limiting accountability and learning.
 ¡ Reported expectations regarding culture’s contribution 
to cultural, social, economic and environmental 
outcomes have decreased. Cultural outcomes fell from 
65% to 39%, and environmental outcomes from 17% 
to 1 1%. This trend suggests that although culture is 
mentioned in NDPs and NSDPs, its transformative 
potential – particularly in relation to climate action 
– could be more fully realized.
 ¡ Despite evidence that cultural and creative industries 
can advance environmental sustainability, few 
development plans explicitly link culture to climate 
goals. Carbon footprint measurement in the sector 
is minimal, and no global dataset on the sector’s 
environmental impact exists. Exploratory analysis 
suggests that the cultural and creative industries 
generated approximately 1 ,028 million tonnes of CO2 
in 2022 – comparable to emissions from land-use 
change (1 ,145 million tonnes) but far below those 
from transport (7 ,941 million tonnes).
KEY FINDINGS
167
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
PROGRESS
EMERGING TRENDS
87% of countries have policies 
promoting cultural participation, 
reflecting culture’s role in 
social cohesion
Promoting awareness 
and behavioural change 
on climate change 
Driving urban 
and rural 
revitalization efforts 
Spurring innovation 
and diversifying 
economic growth
Fostering social 
cohesion and community 
engagement
Culture is a key driver of sustainable development
Increasing recognition of culture as a 
driver of sustainable development
 ¡ 76% ➞ 93% Countries involve 
cultural agencies in sustainable 
development planning 
 ¡ 63% ➞ 85% Countries identify the sector 
as strategic in NDPs and NSDPs 
Commitments on culture in development have 
not always translated into concrete action: 
 ¡ While 77% of countries reference culture in their 
NDPs, only 56% set specific cultural goals 
 ¡ Few development plans explicitly link 
culture to climate goals
 ¡ Only 25% of measures integrating culture in 
sustainable development frameworks have been 
evaluated, limiting accountability and learning
Lowered expectations for outcomes from integrating culture
65% ➞ 39% Countries expect culture to drive cultural outcomes
17% ➞ 11 % Countries expect culture to drive environmental outcomes
Disparities persist in access to 
cultural infrastructure, most notably in 
low-income areas
Carbon footprint measurement of 
cultural and creative industries is minimal
Funding for culture in international 
development cooperation is insufficient –
only 0.15% of Country Programmable Aid 
went to culture and recreation in 2022
58% of countries integrate culture into 
international development cooperation 
strategies
Culture-led regeneration initiatives 
continue to expand at the local level 
– 85% of countries report initiatives 
at regional, urban or rural level
International and regional 
development banks, particularly in Africa, 
are playing a growing role as investors 
in creative economies
CHALLENGES
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
168
INTRODUCTION
For sustainable development to be achieved, it is crucial 
to harmonize economic growth, cultural vitality, social 
inclusion and environmental protection. These elements 
are interconnected, and all are crucial for the well-being 
of individuals and societies. It marks a paradigm shift 
toward a more holistic approach, away from purely 
economic calculations based on indicators such as Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). Sustainable development was 
first defined in 1987 as ‘development that meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs’ (Brundtland, 1987), 
a definition that continues to be valid as the underpinning 
for the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). However, the ways to achieve this aspiration have 
since evolved within major multilateral frameworks and 
initiatives to also integrate other aspects fundamental to 
human development. These include the Convention on 
the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions (2005 Convention), whose Article 13 urges 
Parties to integrate culture in their development policies 
at all levels, while Article 14 calls for international 
cooperation for sustainable development and poverty 
reduction, especially in relation to the specific needs of 
developing countries, in order to foster the emergence 
of a dynamic cultural sector. More broadly, the SDGs, 
adopted in 2015, acknowledge the interconnected 
nature of sustainable development and include some 
cultural dimensions. 
Yet, despite having significantly shaped the global agenda, 
even these multidimensional efforts to monitor sustainable 
development do not fully capture the intersections 
between culture and sustainable development. In this 
context, UNESCO has played a pivotal role in ensuring that 
culture is systematically integrated within United Nations 
discussions and other social and economic policy fora. 
The Organization has consistently advocated for culture 
across key international processes, shaping major outcomes 
and promoting its inclusion in adopted documents and 
commitments – notably the Pact for the Future adopted 
in 2024 – thereby reinforcing culture’s role as a driver of 
sustainable development. Through strategic initiatives – 
such as the Group of Friends on Culture, partnerships with 
the G20, G7 , and 29th and 30th Conferences of the Parties 
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (COP29 and COP30), technical contributions 
to the Fourth United Nations Conference on Financing 
for Development (2025), as well as support for regional 
strategies in the Pacific and Caribbean – UNESCO has 
reinforced culture as a driver of sustainable development. 
Contributions to the United Nations Secretary-General’s 
2025 Report on Culture and Sustainable Development 
(UNGA, 2025), alongside ongoing inter-agency work on 
cultural rights, further demonstrate the Organization’s 
comprehensive engagement. These efforts highlight 
the multifaceted ways culture underpins sustainable 
development, from shaping values and aspirations and 
nurturing traditional knowledge, to fostering creativity for 
more sustainable futures (COST and University of Jyväskylä, 
2015; Duxbury et al., 2017; Hawkes, 2001; Nussbaum, 
201 1; Sen, 1999). At the same time, tensions persist within 
the cultural and creative sectors, as cultural policies often 
prioritize economic impact over broader cultural value in 
sustainable societies.
This chapter builds on the multidimensional value of culture 
for sustainability. At its core is the recognition that arts and 
culture are levers of social cohesion, fostering integration 
and a sense of belonging, and that artistic and creative 
practices nurture critical thinking and imagination – each 
essential for tackling complex sustainability challenges. 
The chapter also acknowledges that both the nature of the 
creative sector itself and its contributions to sustainable 
development vary widely between regions, shaped by 
national contexts, diverse cultural policy practices and 
development priorities.
Based on Quadrennial Periodic Reports data from 2021 
to 2024, four key questions are explored: How is culture 
integrated into national development plans and national 
sustainable development plans? What outcomes are 
expected from integrating culture and creativity into 
these frameworks? How do cultural and creative sectors 
contribute to environmental sustainability? And finally, how 
are creativity and cultural expressions recognized within 
international cooperation for sustainable development? 
When addressing these questions, one aspect stands out: 
while cultural and creative industries have gained ground in 
development plans and strategies, a stark disconnect exists 
between narrative and action. The potential is undeniable 
– but turning words into deeds will require visionary and 
sustained effort. 
CULTURE: A TRANSFORMATIVE FORCE 
FOR DEVELOPMENT
Culture’s strategic role in sustainable development 
planning
Since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, countries have worked to align their national 
plans with the SDGs. The results, however, are sobering: 
only 17% of the SDG targets are on track, nearly half are 
showing minimal or moderate progress, and progress on 
over one-third has stalled or even regressed (UN, 2024). 
169
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
While these trends are deeply worrying, progress is still 
being made. National development plans (NDPs) and 
national sustainable development plans (NSDPs) serve 
as strategic frameworks that guide governments in 
setting medium- and long-term development objectives. 
From a cultural perspective, a positive development is 
that cultural bodies have been increasingly involved in 
national sustainable development planning, giving culture 
a more prominent role. Between the 2017-2020 and the 
2021-2024 Quadrennial Periodic Reporting cycles, a 
growing number of Parties reported that public cultural 
bodies and agencies responsible for culture were engaged 
in the design and implementation of NDPs or NSDPs 
(Figure 8.1). 
In the previous reporting period, this involvement 
accounted for about three-quarters of all Parties 
(76%). By 2021-2024, nearly all Parties reported 
such participation (93%), with only minor differences 
between developed countries (98%) and developing 
countries (93%). From a regional perspective, the most 
significant increases occurred in Western European and 
North American States (from 68% to 100%), and across 
African States (from 65% to 97%). 
Consequently, culture (94%) and, more specifically, cultural 
and creative industries (85%) are reported as having been 
recognized for their strategic role in NDPs and NSDPs 
(Figure 8.2) – a significant increase compared to the 
previous 2017-2020 reporting period. This growth is largely 
driven by the stronger recognition of the cultural and 
creative industries in NDPs and NSDPs, which rose from 
63% to 85%. 
A closer examination of the recognition of cultural and 
creative industries in NDPs and NSDPs, reveals a notable 
shift among developed countries. Whereas they previously 
reported the least attention to cultural and creative 
industries (47%), they now report a substantial increase, 
reaching 81% in their Quadrennial Periodic Reports. 
Overall, this trend suggests that both developing and 
developed countries increasingly acknowledge the value 
of contemporary creativity for sustainable development. 
Developing countries continue to report slightly higher 
levels of integration, with a difference of six percentage 
points. This pattern is consistent with previous reporting 
cycles, in which developing countries led efforts to 
integrate culture – and particularly cultural and creative 
industries – into development planning. While the gap 
remains small, it may indicate a more holistic approach 
to sustainable development among developing countries, 
persisting across reporting periods. 
Figure 8.1
Proportion of Parties where public cultural bodies and 
agencies responsible for culture or creative industries 
are involved in the design and implementation of 
national development plans or national sustainable 
development plans, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Figure 8.2
Proportion of Parties that recognize cultural and 
creative industries in national development plans or 
national sustainable development plans
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
73%
65%
70%
82%
94%
68%
76%
92%
97%
85%
81%
100%
100%
93%
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
88%
66%
63%
94%
77%
85%
Culture
(in general)
Creativity and
innovation
Cultural
and creative
industries
170
At the regional level, it is also worth noting that 100% 
of Parties in Arab States and 93% of those in Africa 
recognize the cultural and creative industries in their 
NDPs and NSDPs. In the Arab States, particularly within 
the Gulf States, there is currently sustained large-scale 
investment in both cultural infrastructure and the growth 
of creative industries. It is therefore no surprise that the 
Arab States region is most strongly associating ‘creativity 
and innovation’ with their NDPs and NSDPs, with 92% of 
Parties doing so. 
The measures reported through the Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports underscore the central role of cultural and 
creative industries and innovation in the Arab region. For 
instance, in the United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi’s Culture 
and Creative Industries Strategy (2020-2024) seeks to 
strengthen Abu Dhabi’s position as a globally recognized 
centre of creative talent and a leading regional producer 
and exporter of creative and cultural content. It also seeks 
to position the cultural and creative industries as a critical 
contributor to liveability and vitality in the community, 
as well as to economic development and diversification, 
including job creation. The United Arab Emirates’ broader 
2031 Vision also links the cultural and creative industries 
to its ambition to foster innovation. Similarly, Kuwait’s 
National Development Plan (2020-2025), themed around 
private sector development as an engine for economic 
expansion, positions the creative economy as a means to 
diversify growth. A key initiative is the proposed Kuwait 
Film Fund, signalling the country’s view that media 
production can drive job creation, spur innovation and 
promote Kuwaiti arts and culture.
The Africa region also stands out for its strong emphasis on 
cultural and creative industries, reflected in the measures 
reported through the Quadrennial Periodic Reports. 
These measures highlight a significant focus on creative 
entrepreneurship and on formalizing and structuring 
the creative economy, as illustrated by the example from 
South Africa (Box 8.1). Ghana’s National Medium-term 
Development Policy Framework (2022-2025) includes 
creative arts development as a key objective for economic 
development. Strategies include enforcing regulatory 
frameworks for the creative arts industry; strengthening 
the National Creative Arts Council; promoting public-
private partnerships in the development of the creative 
arts industry; promoting partnerships and participation 
in global arts events and businesses; and strengthening 
institutional coordination. Kenya’s Vision 2030 establishes 
culture as a national development pillar, linking identity, 
cohesion and tourism potential. The country’s Fourth 
Medium Term Plan (2023-2027) includes ‘the digital 
superhighway and creative economy’ as a pillar. 
Box 8.1 •  South Africa: platforms, pipelines 
and live circuits for creative economy 
development
The public and private sectors in South Africa have 
developed a series of measures and platforms to support 
the cultural and creative industries. These include 
investments in development labs and residencies, 
support for venue networks and touring circuits to 
reach townships and secondary cities, and efforts to 
strengthen creative practice rights, Intellectual Property 
literacy and management skills. 
One example is the cultural events investment 
programme of the Department of Sport, Arts and 
Culture within the Mzansi Golden Economy initiative. 
The cultural events workstream supports large- and 
small-scale local, regional and national events that 
promote arts, culture and heritage and that contribute 
to local economic development, job creation and 
audience development. 
Another example is Concerts SA, a joint South African-
Norwegian live music development project involving 
the Southern African Music Rights Organisation and 
currently managed by IKS Cultural Consulting. By 
working with musicians, promoters, venue owners 
and audiences, and providing support to the sector 
through research and skills development for music 
professionals, the project aims to build a vibrant and 
viable live music circuit. Since 2012, it has focused 
on developing touring circuits in three provinces 
and connections with urban centres across the wider 
Southern African region. In 2014 it established a 
Mobility Fund, followed in 2020 by a Digital Mobility 
Fund in response to the challenges faced by the live 
music scene due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Source: South Africa QPR, 2022, 2024
From commitment to action: the remaining gap
For this report, a structured analysis of policy documents was 
conducted on a sample of 109 NDPs and NSDPs, of which 
79 were newly identified from the 2021-2024 period and 
30 remained valid from the analysis of the previous edition 
of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report. This in-depth 
content analysis revealed a more nuanced picture. The 
findings indicate a slight global decline in the proportion of 
countries referencing culture within their NDPs and NSDPs: 
from 80% in 2017-2020 to 77% in 2021-2024, primarily 
driven by a decrease among developed countries referencing 
culture in these documents. 
171
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
However, a growing share of countries (56%) now 
includes specific cultural goals within the NDPs and 
NSDPs, up from 44% during the 2017-2020 reporting 
cycle. This notable increase has been driven almost 
entirely by developing countries, where the proportion rose 
by 19 percentage points (from 40% to 59%), compared to 
a modest three-point increase among developed countries 
(from 47% to 50%). 
Yet, if 94% of Parties report that culture is recognized in 
their NDPs and NSDPs (Figure 8.2) and 77% explicitly 
refer to culture within their plans, only 56% include 
specific cultural goals. This indicates that a gap persists 
between general commitments and the translation of 
those commitments into concrete actions to actually 
embed culture into NDPs and NSDPs as a driver for 
sustainable development. 
However, this gap is narrowing. In 2017-2020, the difference 
globally between the proportion of countries that only 
mentioned culture versus those that also included specific 
goals within NDPs and NSDPs was 38 percentage points. 
By 2021-2024, this formerly wide gap had narrowed to 21 
percentage points. Again, developing countries have driven 
most of this progress – which may be due to a more strategic 
positioning of culture within national policy. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
of culture-related outcomes 
Contrary to the high level of participation of cultural 
bodies in development planning and the integration of 
culture within NDPs and NSDPs (Figures 8.1 and 8.2), 
the monitoring and evaluation of culture-related outcomes 
in these development plans is a minority pursuit. Out of 
533 measures reported by Parties to the 2005 Convention 
to integrate culture into sustainable development 
frameworks, only 25% have been subject to monitoring 
and evaluation processes.
Monitoring and evaluation are key to assessing the progress 
of delivery and identifying what works, as well as providing a 
comprehensive assessment of outcomes and impacts. Parties 
have adopted a variety of approaches to this, sometimes 
supported by indicators and measurement frameworks. 
For example, the United Arab Emirates SDG Data Hub is a 
platform designed to monitor and track the nation’s progress 
toward achieving the SDGs. Its main features include data 
collection and analysis from various sectors including culture 
and creative industries. Additionally, it has helped pinpoint 
gaps in progress, prompting targeted actions in areas that 
are falling behind. 
Mexico reported creating the first key indicators for the 
culture sector through the National Institute of Statistics 
and Geography and the Ministry of Culture. Measurement 
of the cultural sector’s economic impact was previously 
limited to the Cultural Satellite Account of Mexico. 
However, recognizing the need for more comprehensive 
data, efforts were made to gather additional information. 
This expanded dataset will allow greater utilization of 
statistical tools and instruments, enabling a deeper 
understanding of culture’s role and its significance in the 
country’s economic and social contributions. 
Through the Colombia-Uruguay South-South Cooperation 
programme, Uruguay partnered with Colombia to create 
and adapt a Culture Satellite Account. This strengthened 
Uruguay’s ability to monitor and measure the economic 
contribution of its creative industries – such as their 
impact on GDP and employment – over the long term. 
By developing new statistical methodologies and 
facilitating expert exchanges, the initiative established 
a solid foundation for evaluating sector outcomes and 
informing evidence-based policy. 
To fill the gap of cultural indicators in the 17 SDGs, 
Estonia has introduced an 18th goal dedicated to 
‘the viability of the cultural space’, which directs 
the Estonia 2035 action plan and other sustainable 
development frameworks. Estonia monitors its progress 
toward this goal via the Cultural Participation Survey, 
the most recent of which, conducted in 2024, indicated 
a return to pre-pandemic levels of ‘general’ cultural 
participation. 
OUTCOMES OF INTEGRATING CULTURE 
IN NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
Lowered expectations for outcomes 
Another key trend linked to culture and sustainable 
development lies in how development plans articulate 
priority outcomes associated with culture. This trend is 
examined through an additional layer of analysis on a 
sample of NDPs and NSDPs (Figure 8.3). The analysis 
shows a global decrease between the 2017-2020 and 
2021-2024 reporting cycles in the number of countries 
that have NDPs and NSDPs that explicitly incorporate 
culture to achieve specific cultural, social, economic and 
environmental outcomes. This decline is observed across 
both developed and developing countries, with one 
notable exception: developed countries show an increase 
from 49% to 54% in references to culture as a driver of 
economic outcomes. 
172
Figure 8.3
Percentage of countries using culture to achieve cultural, social, economic and environmental outcomes, 
by developing and developed countries
Source: BOP Consulting (2025)
Global total Developing countries Developed countries
39%
57%
48%
11%
37%
56%
45%
8%
43%
60%
54%
17%
Cultural
outcomes
Social
outcomes
Economic
outcomes
Environmental
outcomes
2021-2024
Global total Developing countries Developed countries
Cultural
outcomes
Social
outcomes
Economic
outcomes
Environmental
outcomes
2017-2020
65% 63%
54%
17%
67%
64%
57%
15%
57%
60%
49%
23%
The document analysis shows that cultural outcomes, 
which had been the most prevalent outcomes intended 
to be achieved by including culture within NDPs and 
NSDPs during the 2017-2020 period, experienced the 
most significant decrease by 2021-2024. This resulted 
in only 39% of countries intending to generate cultural 
outcomes in 2021-2024, compared with 65% in the 
previous reporting period. As a result, cultural outcomes 
fell below both social and economic outcomes in the 
frequency with which they are mentioned. This conclusion 
may reflect the emphasis of post-pandemic strategies 
on social and economic recovery. However, given that 
social and economic outcomes have also declined, 
the sharper drop in cultural outcomes may signal a 
significant deprioritization of the creative sector in 
sustainable planning – a trend that could have long-term 
repercussions for other policy areas. In addition, renewed 
efforts to accelerate progress on the SDGs – amid growing 
awareness of limited progress – have not favoured culture, 
given its relatively modest presence in the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development.
Box 8.2 •  Spain: cultural rights as a pillar of 
sustainable development
Spain introduced a Cultural Rights Plan in July 2025 
following a participatory development process. The 
Plan represents a firm commitment to a new approach 
to cultural policies: an approach that places culture 
as a fundamental human right and a common good, 
inseparable from well-being, democracy and social 
justice. It is based on a commitment to cultural 
democracy and confidence in the transformative 
potential of culture to address challenges such as 
the ecological crisis, the redistribution of resources, 
democratic health and the active defence of 
fundamental rights. The Plan has two key objectives: 
organizing and promoting actions that strengthen the 
exercise of cultural rights in the short term, and building 
a medium- and long-term strategy that consolidates a 
coherent and lasting national system of cultural rights. 
This Plan builds on the legacy of Barcelona’s Cultural 
Rights Plan introduced in 2021 .
Source: Ministerio de Cultura, 2025
173
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY 
Environmental outcomes were already the least represented 
in development plans during the previous reporting cycle, 
and their inclusion has declined even further (Figure 8.3). 
In 2017-2020, only 17% of countries incorporated culture 
within their NDPs and NSDPs to advance environmental 
outcomes; by 2021-2024, this figure dropped to just 1 1%. 
This trend underscores the acute need for stronger advocacy 
on cultural-environmental linkages, which will be explored in 
this section. 
In the previous edition of the Re|Shaping report, the climate 
challenge was examined from two perspectives. The first 
focused on the growing recognition of culture’s untapped 
transformative potential for climate action, while the second 
emphasized that the cultural and creative sectors themselves 
contribute to climate change, highlighting the need to 
reduce their environmental impact. This chapter applies 
the same perspectives, aiming to capture progress through 
Quadrennial Periodic Report measures while adding new 
pieces to the puzzle using the latest available data. 
Culture for climate adaptation and resilience
In 2022, the final declaration of the UNESCO World 
Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development – MONDIACULT 2022 recognized culture as 
a global public good, affirming its intrinsic value to enable 
and drive sustainable development. The understanding 
that culture can play a pivotal role in disaster risk reduction 
and management, as well as in climate change mitigation 
and adaptation strategies that reduce vulnerability and 
build resilience, has grown even stronger. Diverse cultural 
expressions are increasingly acknowledged for their ability to 
mobilize shared values and support behavioural change and 
societal transformation, which are essential for the future. 
As Simon Stiell, Executive Secretary of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, said at COP29 
in Baku, in addition to reducing global emissions, ‘arts and 
culture play a critical role in inspiring people to imagine 
and realize a low carbon, just and climate-resilient future’ 
(UNFCCC, 2025). 
Cultural and creative industries have been most closely 
associated with raising public awareness of climate 
change, particularly through storytelling, promoting 
civic engagement with ecological themes and fostering 
alternative pathways to address climate change (UNESCO, 
2025a). UNESCO has taken a leading role in advancing 
the culture-climate nexus through a series of strategic 
actions, including normative frameworks, capacity building, 
technical assistance, knowledge production and advocacy. In 
March 2025, a Reflection Meeting on Culture and Climate 
Action was convened, bringing together 26 high-level 
experts and representatives of international organizations 
working at this intersection. The discussions and conclusions 
of this meeting are captured in the thematic paper 
Culture and Climate Action: From Margins to Mainstream, 
which calls on governments and international partners to 
recognize and harness the strategic power of culture as 
an integral dimension of the global response to climate 
change (UNESCO, 2025b). The Outcome Document of the 
MONDIACULT 2025 Conference in Barcelona reinforces this 
call, emphasizing the need to mobilize the transformative 
capacity of the cultural and creative sectors, industries and 
institutions to inspire and empower societies for meaningful 
climate action (UNESCO, 2025c). 
Several countries are developing and implementing policy 
frameworks and support packages to help the cultural 
and creative sector respond to the climate crisis – both 
by reducing the sector’s ecological footprint through 
incentives and funding schemes, and by enabling its active 
contribution to adaptation efforts. Ireland, for example, 
has introduced a National Policy Framework on Culture, 
Creativity and Climate Policy, and added a Creative 
Climate Action and Sustainability pillar to its Creative 
Ireland programme to drive climate awareness through arts 
and culture – an all-of-government initiative based in the 
Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sports and 
Media. Austria, recognizing the arts and culture sector’s 
growing concern about ecological change and the need 
for environmental action – as well as the limited financial 
capacity of cultural institutions to drive transformation 
toward climate neutrality – allocated 15 million euros from 
the European Union’s Recovery and Resilience Facility 
(within NextGenerationEU) to fund green investments in the 
cultural sector. In 2022 and 2023, this funding supported 
around 125 projects, such as installing photovoltaic systems, 
upgrading heating systems, constructing green roofs and 
facades, and adopting energy-efficient lighting. 
Some countries are leveraging culture to amplify local and 
Indigenous knowledge and perspectives on environmental 
sustainability, alongside other cross-cutting policy priorities. 
The National Directorate of Diversity and Community 
Culture within the Ministry of Culture of Argentina 
organized the Sustainable Culture, Environment and Good 
Living Programme from 2020 to 2023 to strengthen social 
ties within the community and support the exchange of 
creative responses to ecological and well-being issues, with 
activities in several provinces and communities. In August 
2023, the Omani National Commission for Education, 
Culture and Science, in partnership with the Islamic World 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the 
Saudi National Commission for Education, Culture and 
Science, held a forum exploring the intersection of culture 
and the environment. 
174
The discussions highlighted, among other themes, 
sustainable approaches to support the transition toward 
green culture and heritage through creative industries.
There are also instances of international cooperation and 
exchange that harness culture to address environmental 
sustainability, as illustrated by the example in Box 8.3.
However, despite the increasing urgency of environmental 
challenges, significant policy gaps persist. Climate 
considerations remain weakly integrated into cultural 
policy frameworks, and the cultural and creative sectors are 
nearly absent from national climate strategies – particularly 
National Adaptation Plans and Nationally Determined 
Contributions. To date, the culture-climate nexus has been 
addressed primarily through the lens of cultural heritage, 
with only a recent and emerging focus on culture and 
creative industries (UNESCO, 2025b).
Toward sustainable cultural and creative industries
The integration of climate objectives within cultural policy 
frameworks is gradually gaining importance, though it 
remains underutilized (UNESCO, 2025b). One of the 
reasons is that the environmental impact of the cultural 
and creative industries is often underestimated. There is 
no sector-wide approach to capturing data that cover the 
full scope of the carbon emissions or waste production 
of the cultural sector, and hence no global dataset. 
Measuring carbon emissions or waste systematically 
is still comparatively rare, and when it is undertaken, 
most assessments measure only Scope 1 emissions, 
with few capturing data for Scopes 2 or 3. 1 This gap 
can be attributed to barriers such as limited capacity, 
skills, resources and regulatory incentives, as well as the 
complexity of value chains.
To address this data gap, an exploratory analysis estimates 
the carbon emissions of the global cultural and creative 
industries. The analysis brings together estimates of the 
contribution of cultural and creative industries to GDP in 
86 UNESCO Member States (where data are available) 
with estimates of national carbon dioxide emissions for 
those same countries. The analysis assumes that the share 
of national carbon emissions attributable to the cultural 
and creative industries is proportional to the sector’s 
contribution to GDP in the country. While the relationship 
between GDP and sectoral emissions is not, in reality, 
straightforward, this assumption enables an estimate to 
be made using a consistent methodology across multiple 
countries and regions. A key limitation is that the results 
are inevitably sensitive to the quality of national carbon 
emissions reporting data. Nonetheless, this exploratory 
analysis provides an initial step to address this data gap 
and underscores the need for more targeted research and 
policy making. 
1 . Scope 1 refers to an organization’s direct greenhouse gas emissions. Scopes 2 and 3 
address indirect emissions, resulting either from the generation of electricity, heating, 
etc., for the organization (Scope 2) or from the organization’s activities (Scope 3).
Box 8.3 • International cooperation: Group of 
Friends for Culture-Based Climate Action
At the 28th session of the Conference of the Parties 
(COP28), hosted by the United Arab Emirates in 2023, 
ministers of culture and government representatives 
from over 30 countries convened for the first High-
Level Dialogue on Culture-Based Climate Action. They 
adopted a joint Declaration (GFCBCA, 2023) and 
launched the Group of Friends of Culture-Based Climate 
Action, the first international coalition of United 
Nations Member States of its kind, established under 
the joint leadership of the United Arab Emirates and 
Brazil. Co-chaired by the ministries of culture of the 
United Arab Emirates and Brazil, with UNESCO as Lead 
Knowledge Partner, this coalition of over 45 Member 
States (as of September 2025) and 25 international 
and civil society organizations seeks to advocate for and 
advance culture as a key driver of climate policy. The 
Group continues to grow its membership and strengthen 
alliances to advance knowledge sharing and support 
the inclusion of culture in national climate plans and 
strategies, thus contributing to advocating for a United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) Work Plan on Culture.
This global momentum was further strengthened at 
the MONDIACULT 2025 Conference, which served as 
a high-level political platform for culture and climate 
action through a dedicated ministerial meeting. On this 
occasion, the Group of Friends adopted the Barcelona 
Declaration (GFCBCA, 2025) and launched UNESCO’s 
thematic paper Culture and Climate Action: From 
Margins to Mainstream (UNESCO, 2025b), which 
emphasizes that, beyond the UNFCCC process, the 
integration of culture into other global environmental 
fora remains largely insufficient. Building on these 
developments, at COP30, the Group of Friends proposed 
a plan to accelerate the inclusion of culture into 
National Adaptation Plans, as part of the COP30 Action 
Agenda. If adopted, this plan will be implemented 
from 2026 onward with UNESCO’s support, translating 
political commitments into concrete, country-level action.
Source: United Arab Emirates QPR, 2024; GFCBCA, 2023, 2025; UNESCO, 2025b
175
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
Despite the lack of cross-sectoral methods for quantifying 
the emissions of the sector, there are nonetheless several 
examples from the Quadrennial Periodic Reports of sector-
wide policies that are supporting the culture sector to 
improve its environmental practices. These include the 
provision of funding and capacity building, such as the Arts 
Council of Ireland’s 2024 Climate Action and Environmental 
Policy, which positions the arts at the forefront of climate 
and environmental action. The Council has also introduced 
climate and environmental training and resources to support 
the sector in delivering the ambitions of the policy. The 
Government of Slovenia included the Green Transition in 
Culture project in the Decree on the Use of Funds from 
the Climate Change Fund for 2023-2026. The project 
supports the adoption of green practices and promotes the 
development of innovative green approaches for public 
institutions and non-governmental organizations. It aims 
to improve the management of organizations, venues and 
cultural events, as well as raise public awareness of the 
importance of the green transition. At the regional level, 
the SHIFT Culture eco-certification is a bespoke scheme 
that provides European cultural networks and platform 
organizations with the tools, knowledge and guidance to 
become eco-certified.
Collaboration between government and the culture 
sector itself is also key to the development of policies and 
measures for sustainable environmental transformation. In 
2023, Germany launched the Green Culture hub through 
a participatory process involving stakeholders from the 
cultural sector, government and civil society. Funded by 
the Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the 
Media, the hub supports cultural, creative, and media sectors 
in Germany in transitioning to climate-friendly operations 
and reaching the target of climate neutrality by 2045. Its 
dedicated online platform3 further supports the sector by 
providing advice, networking opportunities and industry-
specific knowledge. 
There are also detailed approaches to assessing carbon 
emissions that are specific to different cultural domains and 
subsectors, which utilize a range of tools and methodologies 
adapted to each subsector’s value chains, infrastructure 
and practices. For example, TV 2 Denmark’s sustainability 
initiative aims to improve the environmental sustainability 
of television production in the country. As the country’s 
largest broadcaster, TV 2 Denmark requires every production 
company to submit a sustainability plan and provide 
a detailed account of the production’s CO2 impact for 
each television programme. These requirements are now 
embedded in the standard contractual terms when external 
production companies sell their programmes to TV 2.
3. www.greenculture.info.
The sample totals 86 countries, of which 43% are 
developed and 57% are developing countries. Collectively, 
these economies account for 88% of global GDP and 
therefore provide a strong basis from which to estimate 
the sector’s likely global impact. As can be seen, the 
average CO2 emissions for the cultural and creative sector 
in developed countries in 2022, adjusted for population, 
was 203 kilograms per capita. This was more than twice the 
average for the sector per capita in developing countries 
(78 kilograms). Across the 86 countries as a whole, the 
estimated CO2 emissions in 2022 for the cultural and 
creative industries was 1 ,028 million tonnes. This is roughly 
equivalent to global CO2 emissions from land-use change 
and forestry (1 ,145 million tonnes), but only about one-
eighth of emissions from transport (7 ,941 million tonnes), 
or one-sixth of those from manufacturing and construction 
(6,261 million tonnes).2 
Figure 8.4
Estimated country average of annual production-
based emissions of carbon dioxide from the cultural 
and creative industries, in kilograms per capita, by 
developing and developed countries (2022) 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) / Our World in Data and Climate Watch 
(2025) / World Bank (2025) / OECD / BOP Consulting (2025)
While the lack of harmonization among existing tools for 
measuring carbon emissions in the cultural and creative 
industries is a key issue, an equally critical aspect is ensuring 
these assessments are integrated into national climate 
mitigation commitments, given the persistent tendency 
toward siloed policy making (UNESCO, 2025b).
2. All emissions data are from Climate Watch (2025), processed by Our World in 
Data, retrieved from: https://ourworldindata.org/emissions-by-sector. It should be 
noted that definitions of the cultural and creative industries vary by country. They are 
generally expected to include a core set of arts and cultural sectors, with variation in 
the inclusion or exclusion of other creative sectors (fashion, broadcasting, press, etc.). 
As a result of this lack of standardized reporting, it is not possible to determine which 
specific domains are represented in this exploratory analysis. 
Developed
countries
Global
average
Developing
countries
203
78.3
133.2
176
The initiative has generally received positive feedback from 
production companies, and early indicators suggest that 
the market has embraced the change. In Italy, Green Film, 
initiated by the marketing agency Trentino Sviluppo S.P .A. 
in partnership with the Trentino Film Commission and the 
Province of Trento, is a rating system and certification for 
sustainable film production. The organization also provides 
a tool designed to promote sustainability for audio-visual 
productions and to guide producers. 
Data from initiatives at the subsector level provide some 
indication of where the most significant impacts might 
be emerging. The carbon footprint of music and video 
streaming is one such area of negative and growing 
climate impacts. Emerging technologies, particularly 
Generative Artificial Intelligence, accelerate the energy 
demands involved with streaming. While streaming is 
often perceived as a more sustainable alternative to 
physical media, reducing plastic waste and transport 
emissions, its climate impact is far from negligible. Storing, 
processing and transferring digital data across the globe 
requires enormous energy resources. On average, one hour 
of media streaming generates about 55 grams of CO 2 
equivalent, with most emissions coming from the end-user 
device (Carbon Trust, 2021). As of 2023, global music 
streaming subscribers surpassed 700 million, an increase 
of 90 million from the previous year, bringing the industry 
closer to the one-billion-user milestone (Mulligan, 2024). 
However, there are few governmental measures to address 
the environmental impacts of music and video streaming 
or other forms of digital content, such as virtual production 
in film, television and gaming. While investments in next-
generation computing may reduce the intensity of this 
energy demand, the impacts will continue to evolve. It 
is therefore even more critical that the policy landscape 
prioritizes resources to address this evolving landscape.
EQUITY AND ACCESS TO DIVERSE 
CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS
Culture for urban and regional development and 
revitalization
As the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
Report in 2022 stated, by 2050, 70% of the world’s 
population will live in urban areas, while 80% of global 
GDP is already produced by cities (UN, 2022). Furthermore, 
policy makers at municipal and other subnational tiers of 
government are closer to their citizens than those in national 
governments and are also typically able to move much faster. 
Combined with the strong intrinsic links between culture and 
place, these factors have meant that policy makers engaged 
in urban and regional development have often driven the 
integration of culture within sustainable development 
strategies. There is a real sense that subnational territories 
– cities in particular – operate effectively as ‘policy labs’ for 
trialling and iterating new policy and practice as regards 
culture and sustainable development (UNESCO and World 
Bank, 2021). The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
builds on this, highlighting local authorities as strategic 
partners. Involving subnational authorities, as well as 
ensuring adequate resources and capacity, is particularly 
crucial for the concrete achievement of social, economic and 
environmental outcomes.
Analysis of the Quadrennial Periodic Reports data 
demonstrates that the already widespread implementation 
of culture-based regeneration and revitalization initiatives 
and projects at regional, urban or rural levels, has grown 
again over the most recent reporting cycle. The proportion 
of Parties that report having implemented such cultural 
industry-based regeneration initiatives rose from 73% 
in 2017-2020 to 85% in 2021-2024 (Figure 8.5). While 
this increase was common across both developed and 
developing countries, it was greater among the latter, rising 
by 14 percentage points compared with 8 percentage points 
across developed countries. 
Box 8.4 •  Peru: regional and provincial 
culture plans to 2030 
Endorsed in December 2022 through Regional 
Ordinance No. 361-GRJ/CR, the Regional Culture 
Plan 2022-2030 in Junín represents Peru’s first 
regional-level public policy specifically addressing 
culture as a development axis. The strength of this 
initiative lies in its comprehensive territorial approach 
that acknowledges culture’s multidimensional role 
in development. Recognizing the unique needs of 
Indigenous peoples, supporting cultural agents whose 
livelihoods depend on creative industries and protecting 
the region’s vulnerable cultural heritage, the Plan 
establishes a structured framework for reducing gaps 
in the exercise of cultural rights across the region. 
Following the regional government’s lead, the provincial 
municipalities of Huancayo, Jauja and Tarma each 
approved their own Provincial Cultural Plans through 
dedicated ordinances, creating a harmonized policy 
environment from the regional to local level. This 
coordinated effort reflects successful implementation 
of the National Culture Policy’s Guideline 6.4, which 
calls for ‘sectoral, intersectoral and intergovernmental 
articulation mechanisms’ throughout Peru.
Source: Peru QPR, 2024
177
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
This increase is due largely to significant increases in the 
Arab States (up 36 percentage points), Eastern Europe (up 
25 points) and Asia and Pacific (up 23 points). Meanwhile, 
Western Europe and North America is the only region that 
observed a reduction (down 5 points). 
Interestingly, the measures reported by Parties through 
the Quadrennial Periodic Reports tend to focus on 
secondary cities and rural territories, suggesting a shift 
away from major urban centres toward smaller, less dense 
communities (BOP Consulting and KRIHS, 2019). Examples 
include Australia’s Regional Arts Fund, which supports 
arts projects and professional development in remote 
communities targeting disadvantaged groups such as 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and people 
from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. 
Georgia’s Integrated Regional Development Programme 
(2020-2022) revitalized cultural infrastructure in four pilot 
regions to reduce socio-economic disparities with urban 
centres. In Costa Rica, Arte Sobre Ruedas (Arts on Wheels) 
brings technical workshops and art seminars to rural 
communities, promoting cultural resilience. 
Figure 8.5
Proportion of Parties that have implemented cultural 
industry-based regeneration initiatives and projects 
at regional, urban and/or rural levels, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
64%
59%
70%
82%
75%
88%
73%
100%
67%
93%
86%
100%
83%
85%
Slovakia’s Ministry of Culture distributed a policy toolkit 
to over 150 municipalities and cultural institutions to 
strengthen cultural and creative industries, offering 
strategies for policy making, strategic planning, mapping, 
data collection, implementation and evaluation.
In addition, some Parties to the Convention have 
strengthened the ability of regions and communities 
to design policies and plan cultural development in 
accordance with their own needs. For instance, the 
Canada Council for the Arts uses a co-delivery model that 
decentralizes cultural policy making, empowering provinces 
and Indigenous authorities. Through three partnerships in 
the North, it expands access for artists in Inuit homelands 
and supports them on their own terms. In Africa, Burkina 
Faso’s cultural development councils connect local 
deliberation with national policy, creating continuity from 
grassroots initiatives to national strategies. 
The unequal distribution of cultural infrastructure 
Culture takes many forms across different countries, regions 
and groups. In turn, different cultural forms determine 
the nature of, and demand for, the provision of cultural 
infrastructure in any given territory. Clearly, cultural 
infrastructure is not the only factor in enabling cultural 
participation, either for practitioners or for audience 
members, visitors or users. But the availability, relevance and 
quality of cultural infrastructure is almost always a necessary 
factor in supporting the effective exercise of cultural rights. 
However, assessing citizens’ access to cultural infrastructure 
is a notoriously difficult task – both conceptually, given the 
diversity of infrastructure types, and practically, because 
of difficulties in collecting consistent data. This chapter 
draws on analysis of a rare big data source of approximately 
28,000 geo-coded cultural facilities, drawn from 244 cities 
across 105 countries, covering all regions, ranging from 
cities with a population of over 100,000 to those of 
10+ million. The cultural facilities are limited to four venue-
based categories – cinemas, libraries, museums and concert 
halls – and data on each facility type were collected using 
a consistent method across all cities. The analysis has some 
key limitations, in particular the bias toward a Global North 
conception of cultural infrastructure. 
Despite these constraints, the data and analysis are 
revealing as to the extent of the disparities that exist across 
cities in different regions, and between cities in developed 
and developing countries. The data clearly suggest that 
territories with lower income levels will have access to 
fewer cultural facilities, as borne out by the average 
numbers of cultural facilities in cities per 100,000 people 
across developed countries (6.2 facilities) versus those in 
developing countries (2.1 facilities). 
178
Less obviously, the fact that cities from Eastern European 
states have the highest average number of cultural 
facilities per capita (8 facilities) suggests that history also 
determines levels of cultural infrastructure (Figure 8.6). In 
this case, many Eastern European countries have benefited 
from both an earlier legacy of royal or imperial investment 
in cultural facilities, as well as major state investment in 
cultural infrastructure throughout most of the 20th century. 
However, it is worth noting that the sample of cities in 
Eastern Europe consists largely of capital cities – similar to 
some other regions (for instance, Africa, Asia and Pacific) 
but unlike others, such as Western Europe and North 
America as well as Latin America and the Caribbean, where 
the samples include many secondary cities. This may partly 
account for some of the observed differences.
Figure 8.6
Average density of cultural infrastructure across 
244 cities, facilities per 100,000 people, by region 
Source: BOP Consulting (2025)
Discrepancies in cultural participation
The 2005 Convention requires its Parties to facilitate 
participation in cultural life, including the ability to 
contribute to cultural life and to access a diverse range 
of cultural facilities and expressions. This obligation 
applies particularly to measures that address the needs 
of disadvantaged or vulnerable groups. The existence of 
these policies was widespread across Parties within the last 
reporting period, but increased again, rising from 81% of all 
Parties in 2017-2020 to 87% in 2021-2024. While a higher 
proportion of developed countries report implementing these 
policies (93%), developing countries are closing the gap (at 
84%, up from 76% in the previous period).
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
African States
1.1
1.0
2.6
2.5
8.0
6.6
Figure 8.7
Proportion of Parties that have implemented 
policies or measures facilitating participation in 
cultural life and access to diverse cultural facilities 
and expressions, notably addressing the needs of 
disadvantaged or vulnerable groups, by developing 
and developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) 
Moving beyond assessing the existence of policies that 
support access and participation to measuring levels 
of actual cultural participation by citizens is again 
challenging. As with cultural infrastructure, what counts as 
cultural participation varies by context, and the practical 
collation of data is expensive, being rooted in large-scale 
population surveys. 
While there is no comprehensive and consistent secondary 
global dataset to draw on, there are regional sources. 
In particular, Eurostat periodically assesses cultural 
participation across countries that are members of the 
European Union and other European institutions (such as 
the Council of Europe). Notwithstanding their limitations, 
the most recent Eurostat data are valuable in demonstrating 
disparities in cultural participation, ranging from 18% of 
the population in Türkiye having participated in at least 
one cultural activity during 2022, to 78% in Luxembourg. 
Countries’ relative wealth, the availability and equitable 
distribution of cultural infrastructure, and demographic 
factors are likely to influence these differences. There 
are also significant intra-country differences in cultural 
participation by age, with young people participating the 
most consistently across all countries (Eurostat, 2022). 
This finding is particularly important as older people stand 
to gain greatly from participating in culture in terms of their 
health and well-being (Murtin, 2024). The data clearly show 
also the influence of education levels on cultural participation. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
90%
76%
81%
93%
84%
87%
179
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
Patterns are consistent across countries: individuals with 
higher education tend to participate more in cultural 
activities, while those with lower formal qualifications 
participate the least. The gap is wide: in 19 of the 
26 European Union countries analysed, participation 
rates among people with tertiary education are at least 
twice that of those with only lower secondary education 
(Eurostat, 2024). These findings reinforce the need for 
policy to ensure that socio-economic characteristics and 
age are among the factors considered when governments 
design cultural participation policies to address the needs 
of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. 
In fact, analysis of the Quadrennial Periodic Reports shows 
that there are indeed fewer examples of measures reported 
by Parties that aim to increase cultural participation among 
older people. One initiative is the Arts and Older People 
Programme, run in the United Kingdom by the Arts Council 
of Northern Ireland. This programme aims to strengthen the 
voice of older people and promote positive mental health 
and emotional well-being through the arts. In 2022-2023, 
it engaged over 2,000 participants. 
In comparison, many Parties have presented a range of culture-
led programmes for youth to address low rates of participation. 
For example, Cyprus has adopted a measure to support greater 
levels of participation among this demographic. 
The Youth Culture Card is a prepaid card loaded with 
220 euros that allows young people, aged 18 years old, to 
attend concerts, festivals, theatre, dance performances, art 
exhibitions, film screenings, and arts festivals, as well as visit 
museums and archaeological sites free of charge. Mauritius’ 
National Youth Policy was launched by the Ministry of Youth 
Empowerment, Sports and Recreation. The policy has several 
key objectives, including provision of high-quality leisure 
activities designed to foster the self-development of young 
people. Two key activities are street dance battles and talent 
showcases, designed to support young people to express 
themselves and develop creative skills. 
Additionally, Parties reported a range of strategies to 
address participation gaps through broader regeneration 
and social development initiatives. For instance, across 
Parties in Europe, public libraries are playing an increasingly 
strategic role in culture-led regeneration and increasing 
cultural participation. The non-profit organization EDUCAB 
Romania has transformed libraries in small communities 
in Romania into inclusive cultural hubs, facilitating many 
events for under-served communities, ranging from theatre 
and movie nights to digital literacy workshops and job skills 
training sessions. It has also supported the development of 
services for Ukrainian refugees in Romanian public libraries. 
The International Organization for Migration has supported 
these transformations, helping to redesign library spaces to 
be more open and accessible, facilitating greater community 
engagement and support. 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Culture’s presence in development cooperation 
strategies
The 2005 Convention highlights the importance of 
deepening international cooperation to nurture diverse 
cultural expressions and boost the cultural sector in 
developing countries. These goals can only be fulfilled 
through the deliberate integration of culture into bilateral, 
regional and international frameworks and programmes for 
sustainable development.
Globally, the majority of Parties now report the integration 
of culture within their development cooperation strategies, 
with this proportion increasing from just under half of Parties 
(49%) in the 2017-2020 reporting period to 58% in 2021-
2024 (Figure 8.8). This was driven by a sharp increase across 
developed countries (21 percentage points). The comparable rise 
across developing countries was much smaller (4 percentage 
points), but this was starting from a much higher base (56% in 
2017-2020, compared with 33% in developed countries).
Box 8.5 •  Portugal: National Plan for the Arts 
The aim of Portugal’s National Plan for the Arts (2019-
2029) is to position culture systemically in schooling to 
widen equitable access to arts and culture nationwide. 
A dedicated task force works with local governments, 
higher education institutions, schools, artists, cultural 
and arts organizations, private entities and civil society, 
with the aim of giving a central place to arts and 
heritage in the daily lives of children and young citizens. 
The Plan positions schools as cultural centres, and 
cultural institutions as educational spaces, expanding 
opportunities to integrate cultural education in citizens’ 
daily lives and reducing inequity in distribution across 
territories and socio-economic groups. It supports active 
citizenship and seeks to foster a sense of belonging in 
local communities. More than 300 schools are engaged 
in this initiative. The Plan aligns with the Porto Santo 
Charter, a Portuguese Presidency of the Council of the 
European Union initiative (2021) that sets out a map 
of principles and recommendations for developing a 
working paradigm of cultural democracy in Europe.
Source: Portugal QPR, 2024
180
Regional analysis shows that the greatest increase in Parties 
reporting development cooperation strategies was seen 
across Eastern European States (14% to 41%) and African 
States (39% to 62%). 
Figure 8.8
Proportion of Parties with development cooperation 
strategies, including South-South cooperation 
strategies, that recognize the strategic role of creativity 
and diverse cultural expressions, by developing and 
developed countries
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Reported development cooperation measures include 
Norway’s 2021 strategy integrating freedom of expression 
into foreign and development policy, creating safe 
environments for freedom of speech and support systems 
for artists who are at risk. Since 2017 , Monaco has 
partnered with the Fondation Alliance Française on the 
Alliance 3.0 Project to bridge the digital divide and boost 
employability for disadvantaged communities – especially 
women and youth – across seven African countries 
(Burundi, Madagascar, Mauritania, Morocco, Senegal, South 
Africa and Tunisia). A relevant example of South-South 
cooperation is provided by India and the United Republic 
of Tanzania, who signed a cultural exchange programme 
(2023-2027) to deepen cultural relations between the 
two countries, while also working toward shared goals to 
support the development of cultural and creative industries 
in alignment with broader development goals. In 2022, 
Cambodia and other member states of the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) adopted the Siem 
Reap Declaration to strengthen regional cooperation on 
cultural and creative industries, leading to initiatives such 
as Cambodia’s post-COVID-19 recovery programme for 
artisans implemented by the Royal University of Fine Arts 
of Cambodia with support from the ASEAN Cultural Fund.  
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
33%
56%
49%
54%
60%
58%
Other regional organizations, such as the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization, have explored avenues 
for collaboration in the development of the cultural 
and creative sector. At the 2024 Council of Heads of 
Government meeting held in Islamabad, Belarus and other 
member states adopted the Framework for Cooperation of 
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States in 
the Sphere of Development of the Creative Economy. 
In the Pacific, the Pacific Regional Culture Strategy 
2022-2032 advances a long-term goal to improve cultural 
development outcomes through regional cooperation. 
It sets out five priorities to foster partnerships and 
strengthen accountability: cultural policy frameworks, 
cultural heritage, cultural well-being, cultural innovation 
and cultural statistics. The strategy is led by the Secretariat 
of the Pacific Community – an international development 
organization representing 27 Pacific Island countries and 
territories – and is overseen by the Council of Pacific Arts 
and Culture and by Pacific ministers of culture. 
Regional development banks 
and international development
While policy makers increasingly acknowledge culture’s 
importance for sustainable development, this recognition 
must be translated into proportional funding for this to 
be effective. It is clear from the analysis of public budgets 
for culture contained within Chapter 1 of this report 
that culture-dedicated budget lines will be insufficient 
to support culture’s holistic role within sustainable 
development. Another way that culture’s integration 
within sustainable development can be funded from public 
sources is through international development aid. However, 
data suggest that currently little of this is spent on culture. 
According to 2022 data from the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development on Country 
Programmable Aid (CPA),4 the proportion of CPA that 
was spent on culture and recreation in 2022 was just 
US$231 million, or 0.15% of total CPA. Donor countries 
providing culture and recreation CPA were heavily 
concentrated in a handful of countries, mainly in Europe 
and in Asia and the Pacific, with the top four countries 
(France, Japan, Türkiye and Spain) accounting for half 
of the total. 
4. Previous editions of the Re|Shaping report analysed data on Official Development 
Assistance for culture and recreation, published by the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development. However, these data have not been updated since the 
last report. For this reason, the present chapter relies on Country Programmable Aid 
(CPA). CPA refers to the portion of development assistance that is planned over several 
years at the country or regional level and over which recipient countries have, or could 
have, a meaningful degree of influence. As it reflects more closely the aid that actually 
reaches countries, CPA is widely used as a reliable proxy for country-level aid flows. At 
the time of publication, CPA data were available only for the year 2022.
181
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
Figure 8.9
Ten largest culture and recreation Country 
Programmable Aid recipients, US$ million (2022)
Source: OECD (2025) / BOP Consulting (2025)
4.2
4.4
4.8
5.3
7.0
7.4
7.4
9.9
23.6
30.5
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
India
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Ukraine
Benin
Palestinian Authority or
West Bank and Gaza Strip
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Albania
Egypt
Figure 8.10
Contributions to the International Fund for Cultural Diversity (2007-2024)
Source: UNESCO (2025d)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
1,400,000
1,600,000
1,800,000
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Five highest Party contributions (US$)
Contributions from Parties other than the /f_ive highest contributors (US$)
Private contributions (US$)
Number of contributing Parties
The distribution of culture and recreation-related 
CPA also does not appear to align closely with levels 
of need (Figure 8.9). In 2022, while Egypt received 
US$30.5 million in culture and recreation CPA – the 
largest amount among the top ten recipients – the 
Least Developed Countries collectively received only 
US$41 .6 million (representing 18% of total cultural CPA) 
despite their substantial infrastructure gaps. This small 
funding allocation contrasts sharply with the cross-
cutting role that culture is recognized to play in inclusion, 
livelihoods and territorial development. 
At the same time, international development aid budgets 
are likely to decline in the near term as a result of recent 
geopolitical shifts. This contraction is already affecting 
funding for cultural civil society organizations, with early 
impacts becoming evident (see Chapter 4 for further detail). 
Aside from CPA, the UNESCO International Fund for 
Cultural Diversity (IFCD) remains severely underfunded. 
Funds within the IFCD are counted in Official Development 
Assistance figures, and the IFCD provides funding for 
structural policy processes that are seldom invested in 
by other funding sources, making it worthy of analysis. 
It has annual contributions of around US$1 million 
(UNESCO, 2023). 
182
The number of contributing Parties has fluctuated over 
time but has recently stabilized: rising from 54 in 2021 
to 61 in 2022, then remaining steady at around 60 up 
to 2024 (Figure 8.10). One of the Fund’s vulnerabilities 
lies in its heavy reliance on a small number of countries’ 
voluntary contributions. For instance, over the 2021-2024 
period, France’s significant contribution (US$1 .15 million) 
is nearly three times that of the second largest donor, 
Germany (US$0.45 million). Such figures illustrate the 
concentration risk if major donors scale back (UNESCO, 
2025d). The private contributions continue to be minimal.
Still, the multi-donor nature of the IFCD facilitates support 
for targeted sustainable development initiatives that are 
in line with both national priorities and international 
goals for sustainable development. For example, IFCD 
funding to the association Alwan wa Awtar in Egypt 
supported training for cultural practitioners to strengthen 
their knowledge and skills regarding the relationship 
between culture and sustainable development, enabling 
project participants to implement culture-driven activities 
addressing local development challenges. These initiatives 
tackled the needs of Egyptian, Sudanese and Nubian 
community members, reinforcing the international 
cooperative character of the project and the IFCD. In 
Ghana, the IFCD supported the Ministry of Tourism, 
Culture and Creative Arts to revise the national cultural 
policy. The resulting draft revision includes a section 
dedicated to mainstreaming culture into national 
development strategies to accelerate poverty reduction and 
foster sustainable economic growth. The accompanying 
implementation plan lays out over 60 individual policies 
to support this objective, with a foreseen budget of 
234 million Ghanaian cedis for 2025 to 2030.
One positive aspect of financing culture within 
sustainable development is the role played by regional 
and international development banks. As recorded in the 
previous edition of the Re|Shaping report, international 
development banks are active investors in the creative and 
cultural sector. During 2021-2024, this was particularly 
apparent in creative economy investments in Africa. 
In 2021 , the African Development Bank approved a loan 
facility of US$170 million to fund a digital and creative 
enterprises programme in Nigeria. The financing helped 
Nigeria to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and 
was intended to ‘build back better, greener, and more 
inclusively’ (AFDB, 2021), creating more sustainable 
jobs for entrepreneurs in early-stage technology startups 
or in creative small and medium-sized enterprises. The 
programme was co-financed by the Agence Française 
de Développement and the Islamic Development Bank. 
In 2024, Afreximbank, the Pan-African trade and export 
development bank, committed to increase its funding 
to the Creative Africa Nexus (CANEX) programme from 
US$1 billion to US$2 billion over the next three years. 
CANEX’s activities include providing financial products 
and training programmes, facilitating market access, and 
advocating for better policies for the sector. 
Over this reporting period, the Inter-American Development 
Bank also reflected on the learning from their ten years 
of pioneering investment in the cultural and creative 
industries, which totalled more than US$2.5 billion 
between 2013 and 2022, across 126 projects (IDB, 2023). 
Projects covered a wide range of areas that included 
urban and local development; digitization of the cultural 
and creative industries; support for independent creative 
workers; financial mechanisms to foster the creative 
economy; export and trade promotion; opportunities for 
social inclusion, cultural diversity and human development; 
and institutional support in terms of policy development 
and capacity building for governments. 
183
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development  
For Parties to the Convention: 
 ¡ Strengthen the integration of culture in development 
planning.
• Institutionalize the involvement of national cultural 
bodies and agencies in all national development plans 
(NDPs) and national sustainable development plans 
(NSDPs). 
• Move from symbolic recognition to concrete action by 
setting clear cultural objectives in NDPs and NSDPs, 
supported by measurable indicators.
• Strengthen monitoring and evaluation by developing 
tools to assess culture-related measures, thereby 
helping to address accountability gaps and capture 
culture’s multidimensional contributions to sustainable 
development beyond GDP . 
 ¡ Harness culture for environmental sustainability.
• Integrate culture-climate action into national and 
regional strategies, emphasizing the contributions of 
culture and the creative industries to green innovation, 
adaptation and mitigation efforts.
• Develop standardized methods for measuring the 
carbon footprint of the culture sector, and encourage 
publicly funded institutions and projects to have 
sustainability plans and to provide detailed accounts 
of their CO2 impact.
• Promote greener management practices in cultural 
institutions, venues and events.
• Build capacity and incentives for cultural institutions 
to adopt low-carbon practices.
• Recognize and promote the role of culture in 
supporting behavioural change and the societal 
transformation needed to achieve environmental 
sustainability.
 ¡ Expand cultural infrastructure and participation.
• Promote culture-based regeneration as a tool for 
sustainable urban and rural development. Ensure 
long-term investment through multi-level government 
involvement and co-funding, as well as through private 
sector partnerships.
• Strengthen the ability of regions and communities 
to design policies and plan cultural development in 
response to local needs.
• Scale up inclusive cultural participation policies by 
prioritizing disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. 
Ensure that these policies are supported by adequate 
resources and reflect culture’s role in fostering social 
cohesion.
• Invest in low-income areas to reduce disparities in 
access to cultural facilities and services.
RECOMMENDATIONS
 ¡ Foster international cooperation.
• Integrate culture systematically into bilateral, 
regional and international sustainable development 
frameworks and development cooperation strategies.
• Increase the share of development aid allocated 
to culture, beyond the current 0.15% of Country 
Programmable Aid, and explore the feasibility of 
establishing a minimum benchmark.
• Encourage voluntary contributions to the International 
Fund for Cultural Diversity, strengthening its capacity 
to support targeted sustainable development 
initiatives aligned with national and global priorities.
• Engage regional and international development banks 
and private investors to expand financing for the 
creative economy, building on successful intra- and 
inter-regional initiatives.
For UNESCO and other international 
organizations: 
 ¡ Continue leveraging periodic reporting and existing 
programmes to generate evidence-based knowledge 
on culture and sustainable development, and share 
actionable insights with Parties and stakeholders to the 
Convention.
 ¡ Advocate for stronger recognition of culture’s 
multidimensional contributions to sustainable 
development, beyond GDP metrics.
 ¡ Strengthen advocacy linking culture and environmental 
sustainability, emphasizing the role of creative 
expressions in fostering environmentally responsible 
behaviour. Promote the explicit and appropriate 
inclusion of cultural and creative industries in countries’ 
National Adaptation Plans and Nationally Determined 
Contributions, helping to address major policy gaps.
 ¡ Develop a global framework to measure the 
environmental impact of cultural and creative industries, 
including carbon emissions and waste generation. 
Promote the integration of such assessments within 
national climate mitigation commitments, and 
encourage policy coherence across sectors.
 ¡ Promote the development of cultural infrastructure in 
low-income areas, including by engaging regional and 
international development banks as active investors to 
help reduce reported disparities.
 ¡ Monitor and update data on culture and recreation-
related Official Development Assistance. 
 ¡ Advocate at the international level for a progressive 
increase in the share of development aid allocated to 
culture within Country Programmable Aid.

PROMOTE HUMAN 
RIGHTS AND 
FUNDAMENTAL 
FREEDOMS
Goal 4
© Mestiz, Gran Pez Palma*
© Henrik Kam Photography Inc., 2 dancers in the hallway of 500 Capp St*
187
Chapter 9
Gender equality: 
not an optional extra
Bridget Conor
© Henrik Kam Photography Inc., 2 dancers in the hallway of 500 Capp St*
188
 ¡ Where gender-disaggregated data is collected 
consistently and over time, it provides clear evidence 
of how progress towards gender equality is being 
made. However, both horizontal and vertical gender 
segregation remain entrenched across cultural and 
media sectors, and overall, global data collection 
continues to be fragmented.
 ¡ Developing countries most frequently report training 
and mentoring schemes that foster professional 
development for women by equipping them with 
creative, technical and managerial skills. In contrast, 
developed countries most often report research and 
monitoring initiatives that track gender disparities and 
strengthen the evidence base for policy making.
 ¡ The wave of post-#MeToo measures represents 
important progress but should be understood in the 
context of increasing technology-facilitated gender-
based bias, harassment and abuse. In this evolving 
area, all stakeholders, including government bodies, 
civil society organizations, multilateral organizations 
and researchers, need to build and share knowledge, 
particularly regarding emerging forms of gender-based 
bias and harassment occurring on social media and 
within GenAI environments.
 ¡ Gender-based segregation, bias and discrimination 
are newly prominent in digital workplaces and spaces. 
Women are being systematically excluded from these 
fast-growing digital creative sectors (such as the 
gaming industry) and face barriers in accessing highly 
remunerated positions.
 ¡ Digital platforms and tools have potential to support 
broader gender equality policies and objectives. 
Notably, training and capacity-building initiatives are 
supporting women artists, entrepreneurs and creators 
to acquire new skills on social media and other online 
tools, which they can use to produce, circulate and 
monetize their work.
 ¡ There is growing attention to gender diversity, with 
an increasing number of Parties and civil society 
organizations adopting gender-inclusive language 
policies across the creative sectors. These efforts are 
accompanied by initiatives to reduce the stigma faced 
by trans and non-binary populations, support the 
visibility of their work, and strengthen measures to 
prevent gender-based violence in the workplace.
 ¡ There has been a steady increase of gender-related 
measures reported by Parties, providing more evidence 
that gender equality is gaining prominence in global 
cultural policy making. This upward trend reveals both 
wider recognition of gender equality and a growing 
diversity of initiatives and actions across regions.
 ¡ Despite these indicators of progress, several countries 
have seen a decline or significant defunding of 
governmental bodies responsible for gender equality. 
The proportion of countries reporting ministries or 
government bodies that oversee gender equality for 
artists and cultural professionals has dropped from 
72% in 2017-2020 to 69% in 2021-2024, with the 
most pronounced reductions occurring in developing 
countries. This decline suggests that gender equality 
is perceived by some countries as an added bonus 
rather than as a core mission. This perception is now 
dovetailing with a widespread backlash against, and 
rollback of programmes supporting, gender equality 
and inclusion.
 ¡ Global cultural policies continue to reflect gender 
imbalances. Efforts to promote women’s participation 
in cultural life remain more focused on women 
as audiences and consumers than as creators, 
professionals or leaders. This trend mirrors persistent 
gender stereotypes and structural barriers, including 
unequal access to stable employment, large pay 
gaps and the chronic under-representation of women 
in leadership positions across arts and media 
organizations. While the global share of women 
heading national arts or cultural institutions has 
steadily increased from 31% in 2017 to 46% in 2024, 
the disparities between developed and developing 
countries have widened, with women representing 
64% of leaders in developed countries but only 30% 
in developing ones.
 ¡ Amid the global contraction of government initiatives 
promoting inclusion and diversity, civil society 
organizations are taking the lead in advancing 
gender equality. They are adopting a wide range of 
measures spanning advocacy, policy monitoring and 
capacity building.
KEY FINDINGS
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
189
PROGRESS
CHALLENGES EMERGING TRENDS
Gender mainstreaming is expanding 
in cultural governance structures, 
closing gender equality gaps. These include:
 ¡ Training for public officials and 
interministerial task forces
 ¡ Knowledge exchange with other governments
 ¡ Public bodies responsible for 
gender equality 
are declining
 ¡ Gender stereotypes persist in policy 
measures: Women are more often addressed 
as audiences/consumers (82%) than 
as creators, professionals or leaders (77%)
 ¡ Women’s leadership in national 
arts councils in developing 
countries is declining
 ¡ Women are substantially under-represented 
in tech-focused sectors
From developing countries 
prioritizing training and mentoring
To developed countries 
focusing on research 
and monitoring
Tech-enabled gender bias, 
harassment and abuse are on 
the rise and need immediate action
Civil society is driving gender 
equality measures in advocacy, policy 
monitoring and capacity building, 
amid global contractions
Policy focus differs:
New areas strengthening 
gender equality policies
 ¡ Gender-diverse initiatives 
promoting inclusion and representation
 ¡ Measures addressing gender-based violence 
and safe workplaces
 ¡ Digital tools and platforms supporting 
gender equality through training and 
capacity building
Women’s representation 
in cultural fields is rising
Biennale representation
Best director
Acts at electronic 
music festivals
Top 100 most performed 
living composers
Horizontal and 
vertical gender 
segregation in 
tech-focused sectors
Online 
harassment
Under-representation 
in leadership positions
Pay gapsUnstable 
work
Women creators face persistent barriers
42% 53%
24% 28%
9% 30%
1 1% 32%
72% 69%
36% 30%
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
190
INTRODUCTION
For the first time, the fifteenth edition of the Dak’Art 
Biennale of Contemporary African Art, held in Dakar 
from November to December 2024, was curated by a 
woman, Salimata Diop, and there was equal gender 
representation across the 58 selected artists. The Grand 
Prix du Chef de l’État Léopold Sédar Senghor was awarded 
to Martinican artist Agnès Brezephin for her work Fil(s) 
de soi(e) (UNESCO, 2024). The 50/50 gender balance in 
represented artists was symbolically important as a sign 
of equality in the artistic field but also led to aesthetic 
breakthroughs. Diversified artistic perspectives were on 
display and new themes were visible across the Biennale. 
This is an illustration of sustained commitment, at both 
national and multinational levels, to gender equality in 
artistic production, representation and leadership.
Gender equality continues to be one of UNESCO’s global 
priorities, and the key instruments that guide the work 
in this area focus on the importance of gender equality 
as a cornerstone of human rights, social well-being, 
sustainable development and the inherent power of 
culture and creativity to drive positive social change. 
These instruments, including the UNESCO Convention 
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of 
Cultural Expressions (2005 Convention) and the UNESCO 
1980 Recommendation concerning the Status of the Artist 
(1980 Recommendation), support the advancement of 
Sustainable Development Goal 5, achieving gender equality 
and the empowerment of women and girls.
This chapter highlights a number of developments that 
signal that considerable progress towards gender equality 
has been made since the adoption of the 2005 Convention 
20 years ago. Government bodies, their multilateral 
partners and civil society organizations have undertaken 
efforts to improve women’s participation and involvement, 
as well as to better address their specific needs, priorities 
and contributions. However, in recent years, progress has 
been slow, with certain domains of monitoring showing 
indications of stagnation and regression. At one level, this 
is likely related to the long-term impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic, but this is not the only factor. While gender-
disaggregated data, which is crucial for informed decision 
and policy making, has been collected by various Parties 
to the Convention in different regions, this is far from 
consistent or widespread. There are regions where the 
numbers of government or parliamentary bodies in charge 
of gender equality policy have declined. This indicates that 
gender equality may be absorbed into broader portfolios of 
work, rather than being understood as a stand-alone priority. 
Furthermore, gender equality interventions are lacking across 
all cultural sectors and are lagging even further in areas 
reliant on new technology and tools.
Overall, the issue of gender equality in cultural policy must 
be understood in a broader context in which a backlash 
is now plainly visible. According to UN Women’s latest 
report, among 150 governments surveyed, nearly one 
in four reports saw a backlash against women’s rights 
(UN Women, 2025). Programmes and measures to foster 
inclusion and diversity in the workforce, most of which are 
anchored by a commitment to gender equality, are being 
rolled back in many parts of the world (Partridge, 2025) or 
are being defunded (Šišić and Binışık, 2025; ELA, 2025), 
and gender-inclusive language is being banned (John and 
Akbarzai, 2024). This is a critical moment to highlight the 
progress that has been made and to be mindful that the 
stakes in this area are only getting higher. In this context, 
and as part of global efforts advocating for the recognition 
of culture as a key driver of sustainable and inclusive 
development as highlighted in the Outcome Document of 
the World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development – MONDIACULT 2025, it is imperative that 
gender equality is an integral part of this advocacy.
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES 
FOR GENDER EQUALITY
As a first step, it is important to consider the status of 
global governance structures for gender equality. The 
latest reporting cycle of the Quadrennial Periodic Reports, 
2021-2024, provides the largest number of reports for 
analysis to date, and within those, 69% of Parties across 
the world declare that they have ministries, agencies 
and parliamentary governmental bodies ‘in charge of’ 
gender equality and ‘relevant’ for artists and cultural 
professionals. There is a need to nuance these headline 
figures, though, and qualitative insights from the periodic 
reports help to illustrate the many ways in which Parties to 
the Convention may classify their own work. For example, 
many countries report that they have ministries that are 
undertaking work on gender equality issues. However, 
they are often focused on women’s issues in general (for 
example, ministries of women or women’s affairs) or on 
issues related to the traditional roles that women may 
assume in economic and social life.
Within ministries of culture, dedicated units are being 
created to address gender equality in the culture sector 
specifically. Parties report plentiful evidence of more 
targeted interventions aligned with gender equality 
initiatives within these cultural governance structures. For 
example, in Oman the Ministry for Culture, Sports and Youth 
launched a Women’s Club for Sports and Cultural Creativity 
in 2024, which hosts dialogue sessions and encourages 
women’s contributions to particular areas of Omani cultural 
life including national literature. 
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
191
Several Parties, such as the Dominican Republic and Spain, 
report the creation of gender equality units within their 
ministries of culture, whose functions range from providing 
technical expertise to ensuring that the principles of gender 
equality are integrated across national cultural plans 
and policies, coordinating action with other government 
ministries and collecting data on women’s participation 
in the creative workforce. In Ireland, the Department of 
Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media now has 
an Advisory Committee on the Representation of Women 
and Women’s Stories, which has an explicit mandate to 
examine how women are represented across national 
collections and cultural institutions. Taken together, 
these developments suggest that when ministries of 
culture expand their scope to directly monitor women’s 
representation in cultural content and intervene to improve 
it, they increase their ability to effect long-term structural 
change that addresses the root causes of gender inequality.
A close examination of the latest data also signals evidence 
of regression in several regions rather than forward progress. 
Alarmingly, the proportion of developing countries1 that 
report on ministries or government bodies in charge of 
gender equality that are relevant for artists and cultural 
professionals has dropped from 72% in the 2017-2020 
reporting cycle to 64% in 2021-2024. Qualitative analysis 
of the most recent Quadrennial Periodic Reports found that 
in several countries, civil society organizations are taking 
the lead in adopting measures in the gender equality area. 
Many of these initiatives are excellent examples (Box 9.2) 
and should inspire governments to adopt more policies 
and measures in this field. These organizations are clearly 
stepping in to fill the gaps where resources and political will 
are now in retreat.
KEY TRENDS IN CULTURAL POLICY 
MAKING AND GENDER EQUALITY
As shown in Figure 9.1 , the overall distribution of gender-
related measures reported by Parties to the 2005 Convention 
shows a consistent increase, from 6.9% of measures in 
2014, when gender equality was not included as a specific 
reporting area, to 23% by 2024. While there was a boost 
from 16.3% to 21 .6% in gender-related measures between 
2021 and 2022, in the 2022 to 2024 period there has been 
a smaller increase from 21 .6% to 23%. As was also noted in 
the 2022 edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity 
report, Parties continue to place growing emphasis on 
policies that advance women’s cultural rights and support 
their full participation in cultural life.
1 . For information on the classification of developing and developed countries used in 
this report, please refer to the Methodology section of the report.
Figure 9.1
Gender-related measures reported as a percentage 
of all reported measures, three-year rolling average 
 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Nevertheless, such efforts remain more strongly oriented 
towards promoting women’s participation as audiences 
and consumers of the arts and culture (82% globally), 
than towards supporting women as artists, cultural 
professionals and creative entrepreneurs (77% globally). 
Several factors may explain this imbalance, including 
the persistent challenges women face in accessing 
stable and fairly remunerated employment in the 
cultural and creative sectors as well as the continuing 
under-representation of women in leadership positions 
across arts and media organizations. The ongoing 
distinction between more ‘passive’ (consumption-focused) 
and ‘active’ (creation, professional development and 
leadership) gender equality policy mechanisms – where 
the former continues to receive greater attention – reflects 
traditional gender roles and stereotypes that continue to 
hinder women’s full and effective participation in culture 
and creative industries. In this reporting cycle, it has been 
noted that a number of interventions (Box 9.5) have been 
designed to challenge these roles and stereotypes, but 
this imbalance continues to be reflected in global cultural 
policy making.
Overall, it remains the case that gender equality remains 
one of the principal challenges in implementing the 
2005 Convention for governments and civil society 
organizations in all regions of the world, as observed in 
the last edition of the Re|Shaping report. Of course, the 
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic were a pressing issue 
in 2022, and the long-term impacts of the pandemic 
continue to affect the work reported in the Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports. Many countries listed the pandemic 
as a key and ongoing challenge in this reporting cycle, 
and a few gender-responsive pandemic recovery plans 
were highlighted. Women lost jobs in culture and media 
at much higher rates than men during the height of the 
pandemic, but it is extremely difficult to find data that 
focus on whether and to what extent women are regaining 
or returning to cultural employment. 
6.9% 7.7% 9.3% 10.9% 12.3% 13.7% 15.7% 16.3%
21.6% 22.5% 23.0%
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
192
LEADERSHIP IN CULTURE AND ARTS 
– BOTH PROGRESSION AND REGRESSION
A key theme that runs through all the previous editions of 
the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report is the ways in 
which pursuing gender equality in the cultural workforce 
is a prerequisite to achieving structural change in reducing 
gender disparities across the creative sector. What has not 
fundamentally changed after 20 years of the Convention 
is that vertical and horizontal segregation by gender in 
culture and media continues to hamper gender equality 
globally (UNESCO, 2021). This means that women are 
still often shut out of gatekeeping and decision-making 
roles across the cultural sectors (because of issues such as 
homophily2 and sexism) and sectors continue to stratify 
cultural workers into ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ roles and 
professions (Wreyford, 2015; Hesmondhalgh and Baker, 
2015). Once women do enter parts of the cultural industry 
that have historically been viewed as the preserve of men 
(for example, more ‘technical’ roles in the film and music 
industries or positions of power such as commissioning 
editors in the publishing sector), they still often face 
multiple barriers to full creative freedom and empowerment. 
For example, they face ongoing bias and discrimination 
that are difficult to address or formally report (McCarry 
et al., 2023). They may also encounter disproportionate 
or gendered expectations that are not placed on their 
counterparts who are men, or be encouraged – implicitly 
or explicitly – to commission and support cultural work 
that perpetuates broader structural and social inequalities 
(such as publishing women authors but only in certain 
genres) (Weinberg and Kapelner, 2018). In order to meet 
the 2005 Convention’s goals and Sustainable Development 
Goal 5, particularly target 5.5 – to ensure women’s full 
and effective participation and equal opportunities for 
leadership at all levels of decision making in political, 
economic and public life –, stakeholders must continue to 
focus policy-making measures on equal opportunities for 
leadership at all levels of decision making.
One way to tackle this is to examine data on leadership 
in cultural governance structures, tracking gender 
representation in the role of heads of national arts or 
cultural councils of Parties to the Convention. As shown 
in Figure 9.2, data illustrate the proportion of women 
identified as heads of national arts or cultural councils 
across the reporting countries. 
2. Homophily can be defined in this context as the ways in which ‘collaboration 
is more likely to occur between those who have similar cultural, education and 
demographic backgrounds’ (Carr and Van Raalte, 2025). Recent studies focused 
on cultural work indicate that gendered project leadership (for example, in the film 
industry) intersects with homophily. According to the article 'She must be seeing 
things!', ‘men’s tendency to work with other men persists even after taking into 
account the underrepresentation of women in the industry’ (Jones et al., 2024).
While the pandemic may have led to more flexible work 
practices and a greater adoption of digital tools that can 
enhance creative productivity and access to opportunities, 
including for women, these developments are uneven across 
the creative sector. This is an area in which qualitative and 
quantitative data and knowledge related to gender equality 
are scant and should therefore be a key focus of advocacy 
and policy making going forward.
BOX 9.1 •  Developments in governance: 
the Gender Collective in Colombia
In 2024, the Gender Collective team within the 
Populations Directorate of the Ministry of Cultures, 
Arts and Knowledge in Colombia was established. 
It has three lines of work that echo some of the key 
trends within the recent Quadrennial Periodic Reports: 
first, the mainstreaming of a gender approach to close 
gender inequality gaps in culture and the arts; second, 
transforming ‘sexist practices, imaginings, stereotypes 
and representations’; and third, eradicating all forms of 
gender-based violence. 
The Gender Collective has a training and action plan 
and an assigned budget. The work follows from a 
state-mandated resolution passed in Colombia in 
2023, Resolution 0242, which focuses on gender 
mainstreaming* approaches to the cultural sector. This 
Resolution was intersectional, focusing also on ethnicity, 
disability, sexual orientation and gender identity and 
expression. It led to the creation of a broader Gender 
and Diversity Committee, an intra-ministerial space 
that serves to support the implementation of gender 
mainstreaming approaches across cultural sectors. 
These developments indicate that gender equality is 
being prioritized in particular segments within Colombian 
cultural governance structures and approaches and that 
a gender mainstreaming strategy is valuable. 
In the latest Quadrennial Periodic Reports, gender 
mainstreaming is referred to by a range of other 
Parties to the Convention, including Cambodia, 
Chile, the Dominican Republic, Malawi, Mauritius, 
Namibia, Sweden and Timor-Leste. Sharing knowledge 
between countries working on gender mainstreaming 
programmes is crucial to ensure that this kind of 
governance leads to impactful results.
* Gender mainstreaming, which involves integrating gender transversally into 
all policies and programmes, ideally requires a number of prerequisites including 
conducting a gender analysis, involving a gender expert (or experts), consulting 
relevant individuals and civil society organizations, especially women and women’s 
rights organizations, and implementing gender budgeting and evaluation. 
Source: Colombia QPR, 2024
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
193
According to these figures, there has been a steady global 
increase in the proportion of women in these key leadership 
roles, from 31% in the 2017-2020 reporting cycle to 46% in 
2021-2024. In developed countries, women in this sample 
outnumbered men as heads of arts organizations in 2021-
2024. However, in developing countries there has been a 
concerning downward trend: the share of women serving as 
cultural heads has fallen from an already low 36% in 2017-
2020 to 30% in 2021-2024. This decrease is likely linked 
to the decline in reported government and parliamentary 
bodies in developing countries dedicated to gender and 
relevant to arts and cultural sectors. The lack of attention 
being paid to gender equality in governance structures is 
leading to knock-on effects in cultural governance more 
specifically. It is also a matter of concern that the gap is 
widening between developed and developing countries. 
There is an urgent need for collective solutions to halt this 
regression. Box 9.3 showcases an example of this type of 
collective measure supporting women’s access to leadership 
and managerial positions in the music sector.
Figure 9.2
Proportion of women as heads of national arts 
or cultural councils among Parties, 
by developing and developed countries
Source: BOP Consulting (2025)
Analysis of the most recent Quadrennial Periodic Reports 
also provides insight into the preponderance of types of 
policy measures that are being implemented in this area. 
Even in developed countries where the gender balance 
in leadership data looks strong, only five measures were 
identified that explicitly tackled this issue. Despite these 
measures numbering so few, there are valuable lessons. 
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
2024 2020 2017
37%
23%
31%
46%
36%
41%
64%
30%
46%
For example, in Belgium, the Flemish government 
commissioned research on this issue from the Flemish 
Institute of the Arts, which collected data on gender 
in arts leadership across seven arts institutions and 
207 subsidized arts organizations. The findings revealed 
the different vectors of the issue; for example, ongoing 
vertical segregation was evident, with certain levels of arts 
management roles comprising up to 75% men. Such data 
gathering is vitally important for designing effective policy 
solutions that could aim to disentangle this inequality, by 
tying cultural funding to requirements for gender equality 
in managerial positions, for example.
Overall, significant challenges remain in this area. Much of 
the established research on the conditions of cultural work 
has shown that features of this work, especially at senior 
levels, involve everything from compulsory socializing 
beyond the traditional 9-to-5 working days, to the need 
to be constantly connected and available, especially via 
new digital tools that require an ‘always on’ mentality 
(Collins and Golding, 2024). All of these features can 
make it challenging for people who need to work part-
time or for those who have caring responsibilities or other 
life commitments. Too often, the failure to accommodate 
those with caregiving responsibilities is reduced to a 
simplified argument: women are often primary caregivers 
and therefore cannot take on demanding leadership 
roles in these areas (CCEBA and FLACSO, 2021). This 
assumption is further reinforced by the persistent 
stereotype that women are less competent or qualified 
for leadership than men. However, such beliefs are 
unfounded. Evidence demonstrates that individuals of 
all genders can effectively assume leadership roles when 
supportive organizational and social structures are in 
place to enable their participation. Therefore, continued 
advocacy for targeted research is essential to identify 
where the core problems lie, as well as to develop 
concrete policy mechanisms that support women to 
take on leadership roles and that provide flexible work 
arrangements for all who need them.
Appointing more leaders with lived experience and 
expertise in gender-focused policy making helps ensure 
the quality and effectiveness of the policies and measures 
that are proposed and implemented. More broadly, cultural 
organizations – both public and private – and other 
gatekeeping bodies can play a role in reshaping norms 
around working hours, flexible arrangements and leadership 
practices. By promoting inclusive and adaptable approaches, 
they can support greater gender equality and diversity in 
leadership across the cultural and creative sectors.
194
BOX 9.2 •  SWIFT, Female Filmmaker Project and 
the Urusaro Film Festival in Africa
The continued attention paid to impactful initiatives in 
the screen industries is evident in three newly reported 
measures in Africa. Sisters Working in Film and 
Television (SWIFT) was launched in Namibia in 2024, 
led by the Namibia Film Commission and the SWIFT 
branch in South Africa. This is an excellent example 
of regional collaboration. SWIFT is an established 
civil society organization with programmes focused 
on advocacy, safe working environments, training 
and mentoring, and content creation from women 
filmmakers. 
In South Africa, the ‘Female Filmmaker Project’ led by 
the National Film and Video Foundation is notable as 
another strong collaborative example. This project, which 
is in partnership with the film production company 
Yellowbone Entertainment and state-supported bodies 
including the KwaZulu-Natal Film Commission and the 
South African Broadcasting Corporation, is explicitly 
focused on encouraging women filmmakers, especially 
writers and directors. Twelve women undertook the 
2022/2023 programme of development and production 
workshops, and ten films were produced. 
In Rwanda, the non-governmental organization 
CinéFEMMES held the eighth edition of the Urusaro 
International Women Film Festival in 2024. 
CinéFEMMES reports year-on-year growth in the size, 
scope and influence of the festival, which has become a 
prominent international platform for women filmmakers. 
It also integrates educational programmes led by 
filmmakers for emerging talent, and plays a crucial 
advocacy role for gender equality in culture and the arts 
more broadly.
Source: Namibia QPR, 2024; Rwanda QPR, 2024; South Africa QPR, 2024
Training schemes can also be targeted in order to 
support leadership education for future cultural leaders. 
For example, in Peru the Women Cultural Managers 
Scholarship, awarded by the Lima Art Museum, the 
Antonio Ruiz de Montoya University, the Peruvian 
University of Applied Sciences and the Scientific University 
of the South, provides scholarships for women in cultural 
management. Supported by UNESCO and the Ministry 
of Culture, and established in 2020, the scholarship 
prioritizes applicants from regions outside metropolitan 
Lima and from groups requiring special protection, 
providing an intersectional pathway for women’s 
professionalization in cultural management.
FROM TRAINING AND MENTORING 
TO MEASURES PROMOTING EQUAL 
OPPORTUNITIES
Across the latest Quadrennial Periodic Reports, a variety 
of different types of measures were used to tackle several 
interconnected issues. There are training and mentoring 
schemes to encourage access for women into cultural 
and creative industries, research and monitoring schemes 
to generate data and knowledge, and temporary special 
measures such as quotas and incentives. There is also 
a vibrant set of measures that aim for a step change in 
symbolic practices: these tackle gender stereotypes and 
discrimination within cultural forms. All have different 
effects, and tangible results may take time to emerge, 
depending on the scope of particular measures and 
programmes. Ideally, evaluation mechanisms are built 
into all of these approaches in order to assess their 
efficacy in the short and long term.
Training, mentoring and capacity building
The most frequently reported types of gender equality 
measures from developing countries were training and 
mentoring schemes. These schemes (which may include 
entry-level training, technical and vocational education, 
and continuous learning) are among the most important 
types of intervention because they can offer women 
their first taste of how particular industries work and the 
kinds of roles (creative, technical and managerial) that 
are available within those industries. They also provide a 
range of professional networking opportunities. Recent 
research has also argued that arts mentoring schemes 
may be especially effective in the post-pandemic creative 
sector by strengthening artistic and creative activities 
and networks (Taylor and Luckman, 2024). Often, 
training and mentoring schemes are most effective when 
directed towards specific creative sectors and targeted 
groups of women, providing them with the opportunity 
to train and develop their creative skills, such as in the 
case of the Female Filmmaker Project in South Africa 
(Box 9.2). State-supported workshops and events can also 
provide bespoke training opportunities. In Algeria, the 
‘Djazair with Love’ masterclass held in 2023 and hosted 
by the National Centre for Cinema Development, gave 
seven women from different parts of the country the 
opportunity to undertake screenwriting training. In the 
State of Palestine, the ‘Through Women’s Eyes’ initiative 
from 2018 to 2023 trained a group of young journalists 
and photographers in the use of social media and 
contemporary photography techniques.
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
195
BOX 9.3 •  MEWEM Europa, mentoring for 
women in the music industry 
The Mentoring Program for Women Entrepreneurs 
in the Music Industry (MEWEM) is a regional 
collaboration, bringing together civil society 
organizations from six European countries – Austria, 
Belgium, France, Germany, Romania and Spain. It is 
funded by Creative Europe and supported by national 
government bodies, such as in France and Germany. 
The civil society organizations involved, including 
the Fédération nationale des labels et distributeurs 
indépendants (FÉLIN; National Federation of 
Independent Labels and Distributors), Mujeres de la 
Industria de la Música (Women in the Music Industry) 
and RAW Music, all have expertise in advocating 
for musicians as cultural workers in their countries 
and, in some cases, had already established national 
programmes focused on supporting women musicians 
and entrepreneurs in the music business. 
The MEWEM scheme is focused on building a regional 
mentoring network and enabling women to move 
into leadership and management positions in the 
music industry. As revealed by FÉLIN’s survey on music 
labels in France, the music sector has almost been 
exclusively led by men (their research found that only 
8% of music labels were run by women). MEWEM has 
built mentoring relationships for 140 women, and 
trained another 80 professionals to conduct mentoring 
programmes, which can then be deployed by other 
European organizations. This kind of mentoring 
scheme illustrates what is possible when civil society 
organizations with industry expertise are given the 
resources to build regional alliances and deliver an 
impactful programme in a particular cultural sector.
Source: France QPR 2024; Germany QPR 2024; MEWEM Europa
Research and monitoring
The most frequently reported measures from developed 
countries in this reporting cycle are focused on research, 
monitoring and evaluation of the state of gender equality. 
Research alone is not sufficient to shift the dial on 
inequality and bias, but it plays a crucial role in tracking 
the numbers of women and men in cultural employment, 
access to public funding based on gender, women’s 
representation in leadership roles, and enrolment in 
relevant education and training programmes. As more 
gender-disaggregated data have become available over the 
last twelve years of monitoring, countries have been able to 
1) take into account the scale of the problem in particular 
sectors, 2) design tools and measures to address them, and 
3) follow up with longitudinal and evaluative work to assess 
whether particular tools have been effective.
Research projects are widely cited across the most recent 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports, illustrating the impacts of 
research and monitoring. In Poland, the ‘Equal Chances 
in Cinema Industry in Poland’ research project is a 
collaboration between the Polish Film Institute and the 
private organization Box Office Lab. Their report found that 
only 30% of Polish films were directed by women. As a 
result, the Institute changed its own representative gender 
balance in who it hired as experts to evaluate projects for 
funding, which indicates how research can shift internal 
governance practices.
Larger research projects are also visible which enable cross-
sectoral comparison. For example, in Chile the Ministry 
of Culture, Arts and Heritage commissioned research 
across four cultural fields – visual arts, music, audiovisual 
production and book publishing – to understand gender 
gaps, barriers and inequalities. Chile also reports other 
notable measures, including a gender-sensitive response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic and cultural funding allocation with 
a gender-focused lens. At the multi-country level, UNESCO 
has launched a dedicated pilot initiative to strengthen 
gender equality, inclusive participation and leadership across 
the cultural and creative sectors, through research, capacity 
building and policy dialogue (Box 9.4).
Finally, an observatory model is cited in several of the latest 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports, including from Argentina, 
Italy and Spain, as a strategy for integrating research and 
monitoring into larger mechanisms aimed at reducing 
gender inequalities. In Spain, the Observatory for Gender 
Equality in the Area of Culture has been established in the 
Ministry of Culture and Sport; it partners with numerous 
civil society organizations working in visual arts, music, film 
and publishing. The Observatory has produced reports that 
include statistical indicators for gender representation in 
publishing, film production and the visual arts. 
As Box 9.3 illustrates, mentoring schemes such as the 
Mentoring Program for Women Entrepreneurs in the Music 
Industry can also be scaled up to build larger regional 
collectives, further amplifying the training and capacity-
building benefits of these measures.
196
BOX 9.4 •  Promoting gender equality in culture: UNESCO’s pilot initiative
Under the third phase of the UNESCO–SIDA programme ‘Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity and Artistic Freedom’, 
supported by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), a dedicated pilot initiative on gender 
equality was implemented in 2024-2025, the first of its kind within the programme. Through a flexible, context-based 
approach, it combines research, capacity building and policy dialogue to promote gender-transformative cultural policies 
and strengthen gender equality, inclusive participation and leadership across the cultural and creative sectors.
 ¡ Peru – Professionalization and leadership in cultural management
In Peru, the pilot initiative scaled up the Cultural Managers Scholarship, providing tailored training to women in the 
cultural sector and establishing a Women Cultural Managers Network to foster collaboration, mentorship and leadership 
among alumnae. It also offered seminars on applying a gender lens to cultural projects, including tools to prevent gender-
based violence in the arts. Building on the project’s achievements, a sustainability strategy with the Ministry of Culture 
of Peru has consolidated the Women Cultural Managers Scholarship as the first public initiative with nationwide reach, 
aimed at reducing the gender gap in the cultural and creative sector, and positioning it as a model for institutional 
ownership and capacity building.
 ¡ West Africa – Research and capacity building for gender-transformative policy
In West Africa, a study of the working conditions of women and men in the cultural and creative sectors across 
15 countries offered one of the first comprehensive regional analyses of gender dynamics in the sector. It revealed 
persistent gaps in leadership and access to funding and training, but it also highlighted emerging women-led networks 
and mentorship initiatives. Based on these findings, a pilot training programme in Senegal equipped public officials, 
academics and civil society actors with practical tools to design gender-responsive cultural policies and monitor progress 
through gender-sensitive indicators, under the ‘Girls for Culture | Culture for Girls’ initiative.
 ¡ Indonesia – Research and dialogue on gender diversity in the arts
In Indonesia, a study led by Koalisi Seni examined the working conditions of gender-diverse artists in the country’s 
creative ecosystem, exposing structural discrimination while also highlighting forms of ‘affective work’ and queer ‘artivism’ 
(a portmanteau of ‘art’ and ‘activism’) rooted in resilience and care. The Media and Creative Industry Workers’ Union for 
Democracy led the dialogue and information-sharing process, organizing events in Medan, Bali and Maumere to discuss 
findings and develop a policy brief. These dialogues helped build a community of practice among creative professionals 
and policy makers, ensuring that gender equality remains at the heart of cultural policy discussions.
Source: UNESCO, 2025d
This observatory model for research, monitoring and 
evaluation is one that could be used more widely in 
gathering data going forward; it may also assist in growing 
globally comparative gender-equality datasets, for which 
there is still an urgent need.
Temporary special measures 
– quotas, incentives, bonuses
Temporary special measures are a well-established set of 
instruments used to promote gender balance in culture and 
media. They may relate to broader legislative instruments 
that guarantee equal opportunities, mandate equal pay 
for equal work and outlaw gender-based discrimination. 
A common modality in this area is the quota, which sets 
targets for women’s participation and representation and 
incentivizes or requires organizations to meet those targets. 
These instruments do not tackle the wider social and cultural 
issues associated with gender bias and sexism, but they can 
be effective, often quickly, at raising the profiles of women 
artists and diversifying artistic programmes.
Temporary special measures continue to be reported globally 
although they were not widely implemented in the most 
recent reporting cycle. But what is notable in the latest 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports are the varied ways in which 
they can be framed and tied to funding. There are ‘gender 
incentives’ instituted by publicly funded film organizations 
in Austria and Germany that encourage productions to hire 
women as creative and technical department heads. 
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
197
There are quotas or funding reserves in the music, film and 
arts sectors in Argentina, Peru and Haiti, respectively.
There are also newer measures, such as the 15% ‘parity 
bonus’ in France, awarded by the National Centre of Cinema 
to productions that employ as many women as men in key 
positions. Since 2022, all productions seeking funding are 
required to submit gender-disaggregated data about the 
identity of their production staff, both creative and technical.
These kinds of instruments build in efficacy once they 
become a baseline for cultural funding and by placing 
reporting requirements on employers and producers. 
They may also raise broader awareness about the 
representativeness of different areas of arts and culture and 
who is being hired where.
Gender representation in cultural content
A further set of initiatives focuses on gender representation. 
These include measures and programmes that tackle the 
continued gender inequalities within cultural content, for 
example on screens, in galleries and museums or in music 
production. This is crucial, as gender inequality in the 
cultural and creative industries cannot be alleviated simply 
by paying attention to employment or who does the work of 
writing, directing, composing or producing. These industries 
have huge representative power in how stories are told and 
whose perspectives are heard and seen. They may impact 
how audiences engage with culture and how it speaks to 
their own experience. Historically, culture and media have 
reproduced forms of bias and exclusion – gender-based 
stereotypes, for example, or harmful gender roles.
The latest Quadrennial Periodic Reports recount a number of 
measures designed to intervene in this area. For example, in 
Croatia, the ‘Women and Media’ project, led by the Agency 
for Electronic Media in collaboration with several public 
sector and civil society organizations, is designed to increase 
general critical media literacy, diminish gender stereotypes 
and increase the visibility of women across Croatian media.3 
Ma3mal 612 Think Factory in Jordan has instituted a Cinema 
in Education programme explicitly designed to tackle harmful 
gender-based stereotypes and outdated portrayals of women 
in the Arab world (Box 9.5). Other notable initiatives aim to 
improve the gender balance in how artists are represented 
and in the composition of national art collections (for 
example, the ‘Know My Name’ initiative in Australia, Box 9.7). 
They also address gender representation in crucial areas of 
the music industry, such as ensuring fair and equal crediting 
for songwriting and audio recording (as seen in the ‘Gear Up’ 
initiative in Manitoba, Canada).
3. See https://www.zeneimediji.hr/
BOX 9.5 •  Representing gender: Jordan’s 
Cinema in Education programme
In Jordan, the civil society organization Ma3mal 612 
Think Factory is a cultural platform for artists and 
citizens that uses film as a medium to address political, 
social and economic issues. More broadly, Think Factory 
describes itself as a think tank comprising cultural 
practitioners, artists, social scientists, politicians, 
technicians and others from across the Arab world. 
One of their recent programmes is Cinema in Education, 
a module designed for film and audiovisual schools 
in the Maghreb–Mashreq region. The curriculum is 
designed to ‘confront and deconstruct the stereotypical 
and often harmful portrayals of women in cinema, 
particularly in the Arab world’. The module involves 
examining the historical and cultural contexts of 
harmful stereotypes, as well as collectively imagining 
new cinematic narratives that represent women’s 
diverse roles and identities. Importantly, Think Factory 
devised this programme to train both students and 
professors, employing a methodology that integrates 
film screenings with classroom activities and forms of 
assessment. 
The Cinema in Education model can be replicated and 
delivered elsewhere, as educators become more familiar 
with the programme and its methods. Think Factory 
has also made some of its content available online, 
disseminating its work more widely.
Source: Jordan QPR, 2024 
198
REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN ARTISTS 
ON THE GLOBAL STAGE
In assessing progress towards gender-equal participation in 
cultural life, with a focus on women as creators and cultural 
professionals, one useful metric is the proportion of public 
funding allocated to women artists and cultural producers. 
Another complementary way to assess women’s participation 
in cultural life is through their representation in national 
and international festivals, awards and biennales, which 
is closely linked to visibility and recognition of impactful 
cultural work. According to the latest Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports, 32% of recipients of national arts prizes and awards 
are women, a figure that has remained relatively stable over 
time and indicates that national award systems continue to 
fall short of achieving gender equality.
Research that examines different types of cultural events 
provides a more nuanced understanding of the recognition 
and visibility accorded to the achievements of women 
artists. For example, the global average of women artists 
represented in major biennales across their three most 
recent editions has increased from 42% in 2015-2017 
to 53% in the 2022-2025 period. In Figure 9.3, the 
proportion of women artists represented in major biennales 
can be tracked per event and over time.
This data presents a mixed picture: there has been 
significant progress in places such as Sharjah and 
Shanghai, sustained gender parity in others and serious 
regression in Berlin and São Paulo. At major international 
film festivals, the gender balance of jurors is relatively 
steady at 46% women. 
Slight progress is evident when looking at the winners of 
Best Director and Best Screenplay, which have moved from 
24% to 28%, although these figures remain significantly 
low given the continued attention to inequalities in the 
film sector. Numbers are more promising when including 
Best Film winners, with women’s participation at 42% 
compared with 33% in 2021 . 
In the music industry, the mean percentage of women acts 
performing at electronic music festivals has slowly risen from 
9% in 2012 to 30% in 2023. In Figure 9.4, longitudinal 
data illustrate that the number of women composers among 
the top 100 most performed living composers has increased 
over 1 1 years, from 1 1 in 2013 to 32 in 2024.
When women and gender-diverse individuals are able 
to participate freely and on an equal footing in cultural 
activities, despite persistent gender-based stereotypes and 
discrimination, they can move beyond the role of audience 
or consumer to take on more active roles as artists, writers, 
filmmakers or composers. With access to adequate training 
and public funds to develop their skills and artistic practice, 
Figure 9.3 
Proportion of women artists in major biennales 
in their most recent three editions, per biennale
Source: BOP Consulting (2025)
36%
61%
37%
40%
37%
60%
43%
31%
36%
39%
44%
61%
55%
49%
49%
40%
55%
44%
37%
43%
44%
45%
45%
49%
51%
55%
56%
57%
60%
63%
Dak'Art
Biennale
Bienal de
São Paulo
Berlin
Biennale
Venice
Biennale
Kochi-Muziris
Biennale
Gwangju
Biennale
Istanbul
Biennial
Manifesta
Shanghai
Biennale
Sharjah
Biennial
2022-2025 2018-2020 2015-2017
they are then better positioned to achieve higher levels 
of recognition and acclaim, including receiving high-
profile awards and leadership roles, both nationally and 
internationally. Data indicate that over time, the proportion 
of women participating across a range of cultural fields 
– from electronic music to major artistic biennales – has 
increased. Nonetheless, progress remains slow, and there are 
periods in which gender-equal cultural participation appears 
at best, stagnant and at worst declining.
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
199
Figure 9.4 
Number of women in the top 100 most performed living composers, global total (2013-2024)
Source: Bachtrack (2025) / BOP Consulting (2025)
1 0 1 2 1
6 7 8
5 3 5 3 3 7
12
7
12
6
3 3 1 3 2
6
4
8
4
6
3
2 3
5
9
4
7
10
13
12
11
9 9
12
16 17
24
31
36
32
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Ranked 1-20
Ranked 21-50
Ranked 51-70
Ranked 71-100
Total
No data
due to
COVID-19
pandemic
NEW AREAS OF INTERVENTION
The last edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity 
report noted emerging intersectional frameworks, 
policies and measures that move beyond a narrow 
focus on equality between women and men to address 
gender diversity more broadly. For this edition of the 
report, three areas are worth highlighting. The first are 
initiatives that can be broadly categorized as gender-
diverse initiatives. Second are new interventions that 
are implicitly or explicitly framed as post-#MeToo 
measures that tackle gender-based violence and 
harassment and are aimed to secure safe working 
environments. Third are initiatives that use digital 
technology and tools to advance gender equality in 
culture and media.
Gender-diverse initiatives
The nascent theme of gender diversity identified in the 
2022 edition of the Re|Shaping report has expanded 
notably in the latest reporting cycle. One clear trend in the 
most recent Quadrennial Periodic Reports is the growing 
attention to measures that actively move beyond binary 
gender language and promote gender inclusivity. There are 
numerous geographically diverse examples, with innovative 
initiatives observed in Europe, Latin America and the 
Caribbean, and Africa. Some of these focus on language 
itself as an essential foundation, encouraging the adoption 
of gender-inclusive language policies that apply across 
cultural and other sectors, as seen in Chile, Italy and Serbia. 
BOX 9.6 •  The Diversity Roadmap and 
‘Gender Is a Galaxy’
In Switzerland, the Diversity Roadmap has been run by the 
civil society organization Helvetiarockt since 2019, with 
support from the Swiss Federation of Music Venues and 
Festivals, and is designed to create discrimination-free spaces 
in the music industry. The Diversity Roadmap has already 
been translated into three languages and is available digitally 
at www.diversityroadmap.org. Since 2022, Helvetiarockt has 
focused on the priority issue of sexualised violence at music 
clubs and festivals, with support from the Federal Office for 
Gender Equality. The project has involved both qualitative 
and quantitative research with representatives from clubs and 
festivals to identify where the barriers lie. 
‘Gender Is a Galaxy’ is a related initiative within the Diversity 
Roadmap programme. It began with advocacy events in two 
music clubs, Schiffbau and Exil, in 2022. It aimed to raise 
awareness about gender diversity and the need for gender-
neutral bathrooms in music clubs. ‘Gender Is a Galaxy’ 
offered these clubs explicit guidance about how to make 
changes on-site and exchanged with club patrons to raise 
awareness. ‘Gender Is a Galaxy’ offers a compelling vision of 
gender diversity, and its wider programme exemplifies action 
that advances several aims simultaneously: accessibility, 
advocacy and achievable outcomes.
Source: Switzerland QPR, 2024
200
Other measures involve multistakeholder collaboration 
to ensure that measures include transgender artists and 
creatives. In Nigeria since 2017 , the Gender Council, which 
is a trans-led organization, has partnered with the Female 
Artists Association of Nigeria in various programmes related 
to ending violence against women in arts and culture. In 
Argentina, the civil society organization Impacto Digital has 
developed the Contratá Trans programme, aimed at reducing 
stigma experienced by trans and non-binary populations and 
elevating their ability to work across a diverse range of areas 
including culture and the arts.
Many of these measures are from civil society organizations, 
which suggests that in the context of the global contraction 
of initiatives promoting inclusion and diversity, these 
organizations are currently the main driving force in advancing 
this agenda. This signals that more work needs to be done to 
ensure that government bodies can work together with civil 
society to expand collective capacity and understanding of 
gender diversity as fundamental to gender equality.
Safe and inclusive work environments
Within the most recent reporting cycle, a post-#MeToo 
impetus is noticeable. This has facilitated a wide variety 
of research and data-gathering mechanisms and a clear 
focus in policies and measures on both making visible and 
eliminating gender-based harassment and violence in culture 
and media. Of course, raising awareness about the everyday 
realities of gender-based violence remains the starting point 
for addressing gender-based violence, and crucial work on 
this issue long predates the #MeToo movement. 
Many countries report recent and broad-based measures 
focused on the prevention of gender-based violence in 
society generally. These efforts often involve ministries of 
culture and civil society organizations, as seen in Indonesia, 
Morocco and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Artist-led 
responses also offer promising examples. In Ethiopia, the 
‘Theatre Forum on the Harassment and Abuse of Women’ 
highlights an applied theatre model in which artists and 
audiences work together to elevate narratives that address 
the causes and consequences of gender-based violence.
There are a range of measures that can broadly be 
described as focused on awareness raising and creating 
and maintaining ‘safe spaces’. This includes initiatives in 
Colombia, Peru, South Africa and Switzerland (Box 9.6). 
There are also numerous reported measures aimed at 
establishing reporting and support mechanisms, complaints 
procedures and sanctions. Notable examples come from 
Finland and the Republic of Korea, and may include 
enabling government bodies with ombudsperson functions 
to be extended in the arts and cultural sector, as is the case 
in Belgium. This is an effective move, as previous research 
has found that the informality of much work in the cultural 
and creative industries, as well as ongoing gendered 
power relations, contributes to cultures of silence and non-
disclosure (Hennekam and Bennett, 2017).
Overall, gender-based violence remains a routine feature 
of the lives of women and gender-diverse people, so fresh 
alliances and frameworks may provide new directions and 
resources for coordinated action. What is crucial in this 
area is that measures are not simply reactive. Mechanisms 
like reporting and psychological support are valuable, but 
when implemented in isolation they do not address the 
root causes of gender-based violence in culture and media – 
structural inequalities, unequal power relations and cultures 
of misogyny and impunity. Additional measures, including 
those that address representations of gender or promote 
gender-equal cultural leadership, need to be implemented 
within these frameworks. As a leading researcher in this area 
recently argued, positive changes are evident, but overall the 
post-#MeToo landscape is a ‘mixed picture’, and there is a 
risk of complacency within cultural sectors (Bull, 2024). This 
risk is only heightened in the context of the current backlash 
against funding and initiatives that advance gender equality 
and inclusion.
Gender equality and the digital environment
The final area of intervention that is emergent in the latest 
reporting cycle broadly relates to the digital environment. 
Limited yet notable initiatives make use of digital technology 
for capacity building in areas such as artwork digitization, 
piloting blind recruitment efforts and showcasing cultural 
outputs from women and gender-diverse content creators. 
These measures, supported by civil society organizations, 
government bodies and multilateral organizations including 
UNESCO, illustrate the potential of digital technology to 
advance gender equality in cultural policy making. While 
they represent important progress, they must also be 
contextualized against the serious challenges that persist 
in this domain. For instance, the wave of gender diversity 
and post-#MeToo initiatives should be viewed alongside the 
growing evidence of technology-facilitated gender-based 
bias, harassment and abuse – issues that researchers and 
practitioners are only beginning to understand.
Gender-equality-focused data gathering can be challenging 
in the digital environment, as user data for particular social 
media platforms (whether X, Instagram or Substack) is 
considered highly commercially sensitive and often cannot be 
disaggregated or used to identify users, revenue or growth. 
When considering rates of global internet adoption, United 
Nations Trade and Development data from 2023 indicate 
that in high- and upper-middle-income countries, rates are 
close to gender-equal; however, disparities widen between 
men and women using the internet in lower-middle-income 
countries (where men are ahead by nearly 9%) and in low-
income countries, where the disparity increases to 14%. 
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
201
In Table 9.1 , data on mobile internet adoption rates from 
Group Managed Service Accounts indicate a continued 
gender divide in low- and lower-middle-income countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. At one level, attention 
needs to continue on the foundational work of closing 
the gender accessibility gap and to ensure that everyone, 
globally, has access to digital technology and tools.
One emerging trend in the latest Quadrennial Periodic 
Reports is initiatives that focused on digital training and 
capacity building for women. These were explicitly aimed 
at women artists, entrepreneurs and creatives. For example, 
in Cabo Verde, a programme was implemented to support 
women entrepreneurs through training in social media 
marketing. This programme was explicitly framed as a 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in acknowledgement 
that the pandemic required many cultural professions 
and artists to pivot to online modes of work and cultural 
participation. In Ethiopia, two programmes led by civil 
society organizations (Gerar – The Creative Hub and the 
Ethiopian Women Visual Artist Association) focused on 
upskilling women artists via digital tools in order to help 
them navigate the online art market. 
These initiatives signal that digitally focused gender equality 
measures can be effective when they build on lessons 
learned in sectors like visual arts, where established industry 
knowledge and policy-making experience already exist. In 
these examples, women entrepreneurs and artists learn new 
skills via social media and other online tools, which they can 
then use to produce, circulate and monetize their work.
As mentioned above, illustrative data on content creators 
is challenging to collect, but when available, it shows how 
vertical segregation appears anew in areas like online 
income generation. Data sourced for this chapter indicate 
that, in 2022, content creators across all platforms were 
more likely to be women but that, on average, women 
content creators earn less than their counterparts who 
are men. In Figure 9.5, and via data from Adobe, men are 
5% more likely to share creative activities online and are 
1 1% more likely to monetize those same activities.
Figure 9.5 
Gender distribution of content creators
Source: Adobe (2022)
One other type of intervention that was discernible in 
the Quadrennial Periodic Reports was experiments in 
using digital tools to either minimize discrimination or 
remove traditional barriers to access. For example, in 
Denmark, the public broadcaster TV2 has been developing 
the ‘Recruitment Diversity Initiative’ since 2023. 
47%
44%
52%
55%
Creators sharing
creative activities
online
Creators sharing
creative activities online
and earning money
from these activities
Men Women
Table 9.1
 Mobile internet adoption rates for women and gender gaps in mobile internet adoption, 
by region (excluding high-income countries)
Region Proportion of women 
who use mobile internet
Gender gap in 
mobile internet adoption
Europe and Central Asia 79% 4%
Latin America and Caribbean 81% 0%
East Asia and Pacific 83% 4%
South Asia 55% 31%
Sub-Saharan Africa 36% 32%
Middle East and North Africa 62% 16%
Global total 66% 15%
Source: GSMA (2024)
202
This has involved traditional blind recruitment training, 
as well as the introduction of a tool called Develop 
Diverse, which runs job advertisements and external 
communications through an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-
based filter to ensure diversity and remove unconscious 
bias. While details about its outcomes remain limited, 
this initiative raises new questions about how digital 
technology and tools, if ethically deployed, could be 
harnessed both to support women artists and creatives to 
elevate and share their work online, and to make technical 
interventions that support structural and systemic change.
These mechanisms are urgently needed because new 
forms of gender-based violence and harassment are 
increasingly visible in the digital environment. Recent 
UNESCO research illustrates that gender bias is 
widespread in Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) 
tools like large language models (UNESCO and IRCAI, 
2024). GenAI theoretically has the potential to remove 
barriers to access and unlock ‘new possibilities for artistic 
expression’ (Eisenmann et al., 2025) in the cultural and 
creative sector, but that potential quickly drains away if 
the old biases are reinscribed in the technology. 
Vertical segregation and large pay gaps are also visible 
in the cultural sectors that are heavily reliant on software 
and hardware – for example, the gaming industry. The 
often-cited figure is that around 70% of people working 
in the video game sector are men, which is largely 
reflective of the wider technology sector, in which around 
26% of the workforce are women (Women in Tech, 
2023). A recent survey of professional developers, who 
presumably work more and more in areas like GenAI, 
reports that 93% identify as men (Stack Overflow, 
2022). These statistics signal serious structural issues 
because so-called digital ‘solutions’ lack accessibility 
and inclusivity. Women are systematically excluded from 
these fast-growing sectors and are not accessing highly 
remunerated positions. All this illustrates that old and 
familiar narratives – gender-based segregation in the 
workforce, gender bias and discrimination – are newly 
prominent in digital workplaces and spaces.
Finally, despite the positive work that is visible in the 
areas of safety and security for women in culture and 
media, technology-facilitated gender-based violence is 
of growing concern (UNESCO, 2023). Women working 
in the cultural and creative sector (as artists, performers 
or writers), who are often more visible in public spaces 
and online, are more likely to be targeted by trolling, 
harassment and abuse (Mendonca et al., 2022). 
Research focused on content creators finds that, when 
controlling for other factors, creators who identify as 
women face significantly higher odds of experiencing 
online harassment compared to men, as do disabled and 
LGBTIQ+ creators (Heung et al., 2024).
Legislative mechanisms can play an important role 
in tackling this area, criminalizing particularly kinds 
of technology-facilitated gender-based violence such 
as deepfakes, as has been the case in the Republic 
of Korea (Park, 2024). What is crucially important is 
that all stakeholders – government bodies, civil society 
organizations, multilateral organizations, researchers 
and cultural producers – must now put time, effort 
and resources into tracking these developments. More 
research is needed to understand the dynamics of gender 
segregation in technology-focused cultural sectors. New 
interventions are needed to enable women to operate 
online as artists and creatives without the threat of 
technology-facilitated abuse. Policy makers should 
ensure that digital tools and platforms including AI are 
developed and used ethically, preventing them from 
perpetuating or exacerbating discrimination, stereotypes 
and gender-based violence. International normative 
instruments such as UNESCO’s Recommendation on the 
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence (UNESCO, 2022) as well as 
the Operational Guidelines on the Implementation of the 
2005 Convention in the Digital Environment (UNESCO, 
2017) should be implemented at the national level and 
take into consideration the cultural sector with a strong 
gender perspective. Furthermore, the recommendations 
made by the Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural 
expressions in the digital environment should be 
implemented through a gender lens, in particular those 
concerning the development of national digital culture 
capacity plans and the evaluation of AI’s impact on artists 
and creators, taking into account the specific conditions 
and needs of women and gender-diverse creatives.
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
203
BOX 9.7 •  Know My Name initiative 
The ‘Know My Name’ initiative, launched by the 
National Gallery of Australia in 2019, is a gender equity 
initiative designed to tackle historical gender bias in the 
visual arts. The National Gallery acknowledged at the 
beginning of the initiative that women artists accounted 
for only 25% of its Australian art collection and 33% 
of its Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander collection. 
This initiative involved changes to programming and 
collection development, as well as education and 
awareness-building activities. 
A particularly noteworthy feature of this initiative is 
how it leveraged digital communication channels and 
platforms to promote its activities. For example, the 
exhibition ‘Know My Name: Australian Women Artists 
1900 to Now’, which ran from 2020 to 2022, was 
accompanied by a virtual conference involving nearly 
60 presenters and facilitators (all women) and a social 
media campaign across Facebook, X, LinkedIn and 
Instagram. The Gallery also partnered with a range of 
external organizations including Wikimedia Australia, 
and this resulted in the publishing of 79 new Wikipedia 
pages dedicated to Australian women artists and 
1 ,539 new references added to new and existing pages. 
‘Know My Name’ illustrates how an initiative led by 
a publicly funded institution can work in innovative 
ways to expand the collective knowledge base on 
women as cultural producers and aim for permanent 
structural change.
Source: Australia QPR, 2021
CONCLUSION
There is no doubt that progress towards gender equality 
is visible since the 2005 Convention was adopted. There 
has been an increase of reported gender-related measures, 
and the increase in the number of Parties to the 
Convention and Quadrennial Periodic Reports provides 
more evidence of the existence of efforts towards gender 
equality in global cultural policy making, as well as the 
types and variety of actions that government bodies, 
ministries of culture and civil society organizations can 
take. It has been increasingly demonstrated how valuable 
rigorous data collection is in this area and how, when 
gender-disaggregated data is prioritized, new insights 
emerge that can directly inform and strengthen policy 
making. It has also been observed that gender equality 
programmes in the cultural and creative sector have 
a wide variety of modalities and can be combined to 
prioritize gender equality as a cornerstone of economic, 
social and cultural emancipation.
All these insights provide compelling reasons as to 
why it is important that culture and gender equality 
are recognized together as key drivers of sustainable 
and inclusive development. Gender equality is indeed 
a transversal issue (UNESCO, 2025b). Culture will 
only support sustainable development if it is culture 
that is fairly, safely and ethically produced and is fully 
representative. 
As this chapter has noted, some of the fundamental 
principles of equity and diversity are currently facing 
intense backlash. Coupled with this, the latest reporting 
period reveals troubling signs of regression. More than 
ever, there is a need to work together across the next 
20 years to reinstate gender equality as a priority area for 
action and to reiterate the transformative power of gender 
equality and diversity for all. 
The final recommendations of this chapter reflect the 
need to take direct lessons from the latest data, as well 
as to reflect further on the lessons learned over 20 years 
of implementing the Convention. There is a combination 
of shorter-term and long-term recommendations, 
acknowledging both the important work that has already 
been done and the key and emerging issues to address 
collectively going forward.
204
RECOMMENDATIONS
For governments (ministries of culture, arts 
councils, funding bodies and regional and 
local authorities)
 ¡ Establish dedicated structures for gender equality 
within ministries of culture. These units should 
ensure effective coordination, implementation and 
monitoring of interventions designed to advance 
gender equality in the cultural sector.
 ¡ Integrate gender mainstreaming across national 
cultural policies and programmes by training public 
officials to apply gender perspectives in policy design, 
implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. 
Encourage knowledge sharing between governments 
to promote effective and transferable approaches.
 ¡ Establish information systems that regularly collect 
gender-disaggregated data on cultural participation 
and leadership in areas such as women’s access to 
resources and funding, workforce participation and 
representation in leadership positions. Use these data 
to conduct targeted research that can guide stronger 
evidence-based policies for gender equality.
 ¡ Implement programmes and measures that actively 
support women as creators, cultural professionals and 
leaders. More specifically, governments should:
• Introduce temporary special measures, such 
as quotas and parity bonus mechanisms, as 
formal requirements within national funding 
schemes. These measures should require cultural 
employers and organizations to produce gender-
disaggregated data.
• Support funding streams and programmes that 
prioritize gender equality, intersectionality and 
gender diversity.
• Strengthen frameworks that promote safe and 
inclusive working environments in the cultural 
and creative sector, and develop actionable 
measures to prevent gender-based violence 
online and offline.
• Provide access to training and mentoring 
opportunities to support the professional 
development of women artists, particularly 
in emerging digital fields, and to reduce 
gender segregation across creative sectors and 
career levels.
 ¡ Recognize and support the valuable work of civil 
society organizations advocating for gender equality 
in culture and the arts. Strengthen their capacity by 
providing financial and institutional support, and 
actively partner with them to ensure that gender 
equality remains a priority area in future cultural 
policy efforts.
 ¡ Ensure that digital tools and platforms, including AI, 
are developed and used ethically, preventing them 
from perpetuating or exacerbating gender-based 
discrimination, stereotypes and violence.
 ¡ Integrate gender considerations into national digital 
capacity-building plans and programmes. Ensure that 
the perspectives and needs of women and gender-
diverse creators are addressed.
For cultural institutions, media and civil society 
organizations (non-governmental organizations, 
academics and private companies)
 ¡ Collectively work with governments, cultural 
funders, ministries of culture and intergovernmental 
organizations to advance gender equality within the 
cultural and creative sector by sharing resources, data 
and expertise. Jointly review collaborative programmes 
– such as those focused on training and mentoring, 
gender representation, and eliminating gender-based 
violence – to identify successful models to build on.
 ¡ Apply lessons learned from successful gender 
equality programmes in the creative sector when 
designing new programmes in areas that require 
more research and policy attention, including video 
game production, online content creation and the 
development and use of new technology platforms.
 ¡ Design new gender-prioritized programmes and 
measures that focus on the impacts of AI on artists 
and cultural professionals.
 ¡ Collect data and information on gender-based bias 
and harassment cases that are emerging in social 
media, GenAI and related areas, and share ethical 
practices and measures that address these issues.
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
205
For intergovernmental organizations
 ¡ Prioritize and invest in gender-disaggregated data 
collection, both quantitative and qualitative. As 
part of this, explore opportunities to build globally 
representative datasets on cultural participation 
and cultural employment. A renewed commitment 
to data collection in these areas will also enable 
longitudinal tracking of the ongoing impacts of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and emerging fields of cultural 
employment in the digital environment, including AI.
 ¡ When revising reporting frameworks (to reflect 
developments in the digital environment, for 
example), develop indicators that fill existing 
knowledge and experience gaps at the intersection 
of ethical AI and gender equality. This includes 
monitoring AI-related initiatives that affect artists 
and cultural professionals (as recommended by 
the Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural 
expressions in the digital environment) and 
ensuring that such monitoring is carried out with 
a gender lens.
 ¡ Provide technical and financial assistance to 
support countries in developing and revising 
cultural policies from a gender lens. Strengthen 
national capacities to monitor governance 
mechanisms that promote gender equality and 
track women’s representation in leadership roles 
across the cultural and creative sectors.
 ¡ Work with Parties, other international organizations 
and civil society to advocate for the recognition of 
culture and gender equality as mutually reinforcing 
drivers of sustainable and inclusive development 
in the context of the post-2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development.
© NOLI TIMERE by www.rebeccalazier.com – director/choreographer, 
www.echelman.com – sculptor, www.julielemberger.com – photographer*
207
Chapter 10
Global mandate: 
safeguarding artistic freedom 
in law, policy and practice
Andra Matei
© NOLI TIMERE by www.rebeccalazier.com – director/choreographer, 
www.echelman.com – sculptor, www.julielemberger.com – photographer*
208
need to expand accessible legal support and defence 
mechanisms for artists.
 ¡ Artists – particularly those from marginalized 
communities – are also facing growing threats to their 
artistic freedom online. Key threats include digital 
surveillance and algorithmic bias. Despite this, only 
27% of developing and 19% of developed countries 
report implementing measures specifically addressing 
artistic freedom in the digital environment. Regulatory 
gaps are particularly acute in corporate governance, 
highlighting the need for rights-based, culturally 
grounded digital governance frameworks and robust 
support systems.
 ¡ Artists continue to confront significant economic and 
social challenges, including precarious professional 
status, fragmented funding structures, insufficient social 
protection and disparities in equity. At the same time, 
reported action is increasing: 74% of Parties referred to 
implementing social protection measures (from 40% 
previously). Reports also point to concrete initiatives 
(including by civil society) to collect data and advance 
research on the working conditions of artists.
 ¡ Copyright frameworks are vital for upholding artists’ 
economic rights, but their effectiveness is constrained by 
weak implementation and harmonization challenges. 
 ¡ Equity in access to funding and inclusive policy 
frameworks remain under-developed, especially for 
vulnerable communities such as Indigenous Peoples, 
women, LGBTIQ+, youth and artists with disabilities. 
The latest global consultation shows that only 8% of 
countries reported adopting policies or measures for 
artists belonging to Indigenous communities. Despite 
clear links to international human rights commitments, 
integrated and intersectoral policy frameworks to address 
the compounded inequalities often faced by artists 
belonging to these vulnerable groups are still lacking.
 ¡ Civil society actors remain essential in filling institutional 
gaps. They lead monitoring efforts, raise awareness 
about the status of artists’ rights, advocate for stronger 
protections and provide them with operational support. 
However, effective protection of artistic freedom requires 
deeper, more systematic collaboration between civil 
society organizations and governments. At the same 
time, civil society should be able to operate in a safe 
and enabling environment, free from undue constraints, 
including restrictive regulations and pressures related to 
political contexts or funding conditions.
 ¡ Artistic freedom is grounded in international human 
rights law, and its realization depends on effective legal 
protections and institutional safeguards, supported 
by an interconnected ecosystem of governments, 
civil society, regional human rights bodies and 
intergovernmental organizations. UNESCO’s 2005 
Convention and 1980 Recommendation are at the core 
of this normative and institutional architecture.
 ¡ Protective frameworks have expanded globally, with 
over 90% of Parties to the Convention reporting 
constitutional or national statutory guarantees for 
artistic freedom. Regional human rights mechanisms, 
international cooperation programmes and UN 
monitoring initiatives have further increased 
visibility and attention. Nevertheless, the growing 
formal recognition of artistic freedom and its rising 
prominence on international and regional agendas 
coexist with a persistent implementation gap. Legal 
frameworks are not always matched by the institutional 
capacity, enforcement tools and operational 
mechanisms to ensure effective protection.
 ¡ Political unrest, armed conflict and forced displacement 
have compounded the risks faced by artists and 
cultural professionals, and exposed the fragility of 
current protection systems. While engagement with 
the protection of artists at risk of or in exile is highest 
in Western Europe and North America (62%), the 
global response in this regard remains limited to 37% 
of Parties, highlighting an urgent need for increased 
international attention. Civil society organizations have 
played a crucial role in providing emergency support, 
but many initiatives remain fragile, under-resourced 
and dependent on short-term donor funding. Strategic 
action is required to move from temporary emergency 
relief towards durable pathways for sustainable 
professional reintegration. 
 ¡ While 90% of Parties report national regulatory 
frameworks that guarantee the right to create without 
censorship or intimidation, legal repression remains one 
of the greatest threats to artistic freedom. Furthermore, 
only 61% of Parties report having independent 
bodies to monitor violations of artistic freedom, 
which contributes to a lack of systematic monitoring, 
fragmented data collection and limited accountability 
for infringements of this right. 
 ¡ The misuse of legal frameworks, together with other 
widespread forms of pressure targeting artists and 
fuelling their self-censorship, underscore the urgent 
KEY FINDINGS
209
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
PROGRESS
Shared normative 
understanding
Institutional 
safeguards
Strong policy 
frameworks
Effective legal 
protections
Realization of artistic freedom depends on:
CHALLENGES
EMERGING TRENDS
Only 37% of countries 
have reported public initiatives 
to protect artists 
at risk or in exile, 
highlighting the fragility 
of protection systems
Equity gaps persist in targeted 
artist support measures, especially 
for vulnerable communities
New threats 
to artistic freedom 
are growing online, 
including digital 
surveillance and 
algorithmic bias
Initiatives to protect artistic freedom 
are expanding:
 ¡ Temporary relocation schemes
 ¡ Emergency stipends
 ¡ Residency pathways
 ¡ Legal and psychosocial support
 ¡ Reintegration programmes
Over 90% of countries report constitutional 
or legal guarantees for artistic freedom, 
demonstrating growth in protective frameworks 
Regional human rights mechanisms, 
international cooperation programmes 
and UN monitoring initiatives 
are raising visibility in international agendas
In response to economic and social challenges facing artists, 74% of countries 
(from 40% previously) report implementing social protection measures for artists
Civil society actors are playing a crucial role in: 
 ¡ Monitoring violations of artistic freedom
 ¡ Raising awareness and advocating 
for artists’ rights
 ¡ Providing operational and 
emergency support
 ¡ Advancing research on emerging issues
Implementation gaps remain between 
legal frameworks and operational mechanisms
 ¡ Only 61% of countries have independent 
bodies monitoring artistic freedom violations
 ¡ Copyright frameworks for upholding 
artists’ economic rights are weak
Legal frameworks are being misused 
to suppress artistic freedom, while defence 
mechanisms for artists are under-developed 
CULTURE SNAPSHOT
210
INTRODUCTION
Following the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing geopolitical 
turbulence, conditions for artistic participation are 
shifting, often undermining stability and freedom. The 
pandemic exposed deep structural vulnerabilities in the 
cultural and creative sectors, leaving many artists without 
income, mobility or institutional support (UNESCO, 2021). 
Meanwhile, conflicts in some countries have decimated 
cultural infrastructure and displaced countless artists, 
amplifying global tensions around artistic expression.
Artistic freedom is upheld by an interdependent ecosystem of 
rights, including freedom of expression, association, assembly, 
conscience and participation in cultural life. UNESCO has 
defined artistic freedom as encompassing not only the freedom 
to create and disseminate works but also the conditions that 
enable these rights to be realized (UNESCO, 2019). 
UNESCO Member States remain bound under international 
law to protect these rights and foster environments where 
artists can imagine, produce and share their work. In particular, 
Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
enshrines everyone’s right to participate freely in the cultural 
life of the community and to enjoy the arts, and Article 19 
guarantees freedom of expression. While the Universal 
Declaration is a non-binding document, it has inspired several 
binding international instruments, including the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which 
provide legal recognition to the ecosystem of rights related to 
artistic freedom. Overall, these rights go beyond the protection 
of artistic work, to include artists’ physical safety, autonomy, 
recognition and the rights that underpin economic security 
and professional stability. In addition, the Final Declaration 
of the World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development — MONDIACULT 2022 commits to fostering 
an enabling environment that ensures respect for and the 
exercise of human rights, particularly cultural rights, across all 
cultural fields, including the digital environment. It emphasizes 
inclusive access to and participation in cultural life, with a 
view to strengthening the economic and social rights of artists 
and cultural professionals. Furthermore, it promotes artistic 
freedom and freedom of expression, while respecting cultural 
and linguistic diversity, with special attention to historically 
vulnerable groups.
As this chapter will show, these rights have largely been 
integrated in national legislation and policy, but formal 
recognition has not consistently translated into protection. 
Monitoring led by civil society, such as through reports by 
Freemuse, an international non-governmental organization that 
monitors and documents artistic freedom worldwide, continues 
to document widespread violations of artistic freedom, 
including arbitrary detentions, censorship, legal harassment 
and travel bans, often under laws related to blasphemy, 
defamation or national security (Freemuse, 2022, 2023, 2024). 
Previous editions of the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report 
have also underlined this, and pointed to the frequent lack 
of reliable data, which are essential to identify violations and 
provide targeted support to affected artists. Yet, government 
reporting at the national level remains inconsistent, and 
independent monitoring mechanisms are still under-developed. 
Credible data collection depends on trained local actors, secure 
reporting systems and solid institutional support. 
Economic insecurity further heightens the risks artists face. 
In the post-pandemic context and amid regional instability, 
public funding for the arts has declined in many countries, 
and access to social protection remains fragile in many 
cases, with temporary measures introduced during the 
COVID-19 pandemic not always sustained. 
This chapter explores how these challenges are being 
addressed, examining them across three related areas. 
First, it looks at the legal and institutional foundations of 
artistic freedom, and considers whether legal recognition 
is effectively reflected in policy and practice. Second, it 
analyses the most pressing global threats to artistic freedom 
today, including conflict, displacement and heightened risks 
in the digital era. Finally, it explores the economic and social 
rights that are essential to artists’ professional security.
SAFEGUARDING ARTISTIC FREEDOM: 
NORMATIVE, LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL 
FRAMEWORKS
Artistic freedom is grounded in international human 
rights law, yet its realization depends on effective legal 
protections, independent institutions and a shared 
normative understanding across public and civil society 
actors. This section examines how states are translating 
their commitments to artistic freedom into practice through 
legal frameworks, normative mechanisms and institutional 
safeguards. It addresses a core concern of the Convention 
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions (2005 Convention): whether international 
recognition of artistic freedom is matched by legal 
enforceability and institutional capacity at the national level.
The normative architecture has expanded in recent 
years, under the guidance of instruments such as the 
2005 Convention and the 1980 Recommendation 
concerning the Status of the Artist (1980 Recommendation), 
as well as regional human rights jurisprudence. While 
government and civil society-led efforts have aimed 
to translate the principles of these instruments into 
practice, progress is often undermined by legislative gaps, 
limited enforcement and weak institutional responses. 
211
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
As the 2005 Convention enters into its third decade of 
implementation, it is thus essential and timely to assess how 
legal protections and institutional mechanisms are being 
developed, applied and sustained across diverse regional 
and political contexts.
An ecosystem of legal, institutional 
and policy frameworks
At the international level, the 2005 Convention 
establishes clear and binding obligations for its Parties, 
and the 1980 Recommendation, although non-binding, 
continues to be a central normative reference that has 
shaped national debates and legislation on artists’ rights 
for over four decades. The ongoing relevance of the 
1980 Recommendation was underscored by UNESCO’s 
Empowering Creativity report, which synthesized 
the outcomes of the fifth global consultation on the 
implementation of the Recommendation, carried out 
in 2022 to 2023 among UNESCO Member States. 
According to the survey, 69% of developed countries and 
57% of developing countries reported having specific 
laws or regulations dedicated to the status of artists. The 
Empowering Creativity report thus highlighted advances 
such as these, but also stressed persistent gaps, particularly 
in access to social protection and effective implementation 
of adopted laws and policies (UNESCO, 2023c). 
Constitutional provisions in many countries and regional 
human rights treaties, including the African Charter on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights, the American Convention on 
Human Rights and the European Convention on Human 
Rights, enshrine artistic freedom within broader guarantees 
of freedom of expression and cultural participation. At the 
national level, during the 2021-2024 period, Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports data show that globally over 90% of Parties 
report the existence of constitutional or legal guarantees 
across key dimensions, including the rights to create, 
disseminate and enjoy artistic works.
For instance, building on earlier progress, including the 
removal of criminal defamation provisions in Lesotho, Liberia 
and the Maldives, several Parties to the 2005 Convention 
introduced important legal reforms during this reporting 
period, including Scotland’s repeal of its blasphemy law (2021) 
in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
and South Africa’s repeal of criminal defamation (2023). 
Amid increasing awareness of the challenges to artistic 
freedom, recent years have also witnessed several important 
international and regional initiatives that signal a growing 
institutional commitment to advocate for policy reform in 
this field. The MONDIACULT 2022 Declaration, endorsed by 
150 States, explicitly commits to reducing inequalities and 
reinforcing artists’ rights (UNESCO, 2022b).
Figure 10.1
Proportion of Parties reporting that their constitution 
and/or national regulatory frameworks formally 
acknowledge artistic freedom across key dimensions, 
by developing and developed countries 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
Artistic freedom also featured prominently in discussions 
during the MONDIACULT 2025 Conference. The Outcome 
Document from the event emphasized cultural rights, 
including artistic freedom; the need to support decent work 
for artists and cultural workers; and the need to protect 
artists, cultural workers and institutions in situations of 
conflict, disaster or forced displacement (UNESCO, 2025a). 
Other international organizations have also implemented 
efforts to address important dimensions of artistic 
freedom in recent years. Notably, the International Labour 
Organization organized a technical meeting in 2023 on 
the future of work in the arts and entertainment sector, 
conducted additional research and developed policy 
guidance thereafter (ILO, 2023). Regional organizations, 
from the Council of Europe to the African Union and 
the Organization of American States, have increasingly 
integrated artistic freedom into their human rights and 
cultural mandates. 
Global total Developing countries Developed countries
The right of artists to create without censorship or intimidation
The right for all citizens to freely enjoy artistic works both in public
and in private
The right of artists to disseminate and/or perform their artistic works
The right for all citizens to take part in cultural life without restrictions
90%
87%
95%
94%
92%
98%97% 97% 98%97%
96%
100%
212
Within the European Union’s institutional framework, 
the 2023-2026 Work Plan for Culture proposes measures 
to improve working conditions and foster sustained 
peer exchange across its member states (Council of the 
European Union, 2022), and the Culture Compass for 
Europe establishes priorities to safeguard artistic freedom 
and ensure decent working conditions for artists and 
cultural workers (European Commission, 2025). This 
multi-layered institutional architecture highlights that 
durable protection emerges not from a single body, 
but from complementary responsibilities shared across 
governance levels.
In recent years, artistic freedom has also been reinforced 
through relevant developments in jurisprudence, which 
has contributed to highlighting the importance of rights 
related to artistic freedom within regional human rights 
frameworks. For example, the Inter-American Court of 
Human Rights has explicitly affirmed that creative and 
artistic expression, including critical and controversial 
works, falls squarely within the scope of the right to 
freedom of expression as articulated in Article 13 of the 
American Convention on Human Rights. A landmark 
affirmation of this principle is found in the 201 1 case 
Fontevecchia and D’Amico v. Argentina, where the court 
emphasized that artistic expression merits protection 
against undue interference or censorship. Building on 
this baseline, the court, in the 2021 case Maya Kaqchikel 
Indigenous Peoples of Sumpango v. Guatemala (clarified 
by an interpretation in 2022), recognized community 
radio as integral to Indigenous Peoples’ rights to culture 
and participation, reaffirming the cultural dimension of 
freedom of expression. Such jurisprudence provides a 
robust legal foundation for defending artistic freedom 
across the American continent and continues to inform 
current debates and measures reported during the 2021-
2024 period. Artistic freedom has also been gradually 
gaining importance in the agenda of the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights (ARTICLE 19, 2024).
In Europe, the European Court of Human Rights has 
likewise addressed artistic expression under Article 10 
of the European Convention on Human Rights. In the 
2018 Pussy Riot case, the court reaffirmed that Article 10 
protects not only the ideas expressed but also the form in 
which they are conveyed, including provocative or non-
verbal forms of artistic expression. At the national level, 
constitutional jurisprudence has also reinforced these 
protections. In 2021 , the Constitutional Court of Georgia 
ruled that restrictions on satirical artistic works violate 
freedom of expression, affirming that artistic expression 
falls within the scope of constitutional guarantees.
In Africa, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights has increasingly recognized artistic freedom 
as integral to freedom of expression rights. Its 2019 
Declaration on Freedom of Expression emphasizes that 
restrictions on expression, including artistic forms, must be 
strictly necessary, lawful and proportionate to a legitimate 
aim (ACHPR, 2019).
At the United Nations (UN) level, the Special Rapporteur 
in the field of cultural rights and the Special Rapporteur 
on freedom of opinion and expression have provided 
authoritative interpretations reinforcing the importance 
of artistic freedom. Another special procedure, the 
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, as well as the 
Human Rights Committee have addressed cases involving 
artists, embedding artistic freedom more firmly within the 
global human rights framework. The Universal Periodic 
Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council, 
which periodically analyses the human rights record of 
UN Member States and provides opportunities for civil 
society contributions, is also a significant element for 
accountability.
International cooperation programmes are also 
contributing to improving national frameworks, including 
the UNESCO-Aschberg Programme for Artists and Cultural 
Professionals. This programme supports governmental 
institutions and civil society stakeholders in driving reform 
to align legislation and policies with the principles of 
the 2005 Convention and the 1980 Recommendation, 
to protect and promote artistic freedom and improve 
the professional and legal status of artists and cultural 
professionals. Between 2021 and 2025, the programme, 
which is funded by Norway, provided technical assistance 
to governments for developing and implementing legal, 
regulatory and policy frameworks to advance the status 
of the artist, as well as financial support to civil society 
organizations to undertake advocacy, training, data 
collection and monitoring to safeguard artistic freedom. 
These initiatives were implemented in 46 countries, 
and also included ad hoc projects focused on assisting 
artists and cultural institutions in emergency situations. 
To assist countries in developing and strengthening 
their legal and policy frameworks, the programme also 
facilitated production, jointly with the International 
Labour Organization, of the Methodological Guide for the 
Participatory Development of a Law on the Status of the 
Artist (UNESCO and ILO, 2023). 
Taken together, these normative and legal frameworks, 
jurisprudence, human rights mechanisms and international 
support programmes provide a strong baseline for the 
protection of artistic freedom. Their effectiveness, however, 
depends on mechanisms that ensure adequate monitoring 
and safeguarding, which are the focus of the next section.
213
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
Box 10.1 •  International cooperation supports policy research and action
As with other areas addressed by the 2005 Convention, improving policy frameworks related to artistic freedom requires 
adequate data and knowledge to help identify and analyse needs and design appropriate responses. Progress in this area 
often emerges through partnerships among national and international actors, as well as joint initiatives connecting public 
and civil society stakeholders, as illustrated by two recent examples from Africa.
The report The Status of Women Artists and Cultural Professionals in The Gambia was produced with support from the 
UNESCO-Aschberg Programme. The report features data on employment status, income, internet use and education among 
a sample of 487 artists and cultural professionals. On this basis, the report analysed their income-related capabilities, access 
to opportunities, recognition and networking, and experiences of work-related harassment and censorship, as well as the 
state of gender equality including pay gaps. The study was part of a broader project on the status of Gambian artists and 
cultural professionals implemented by the National Centre for Arts and Culture, with a particular focus on gender equality. 
Building on this, a National Endowment Fund for Arts and Culture was operationalized in 2023; it serves to financially 
support artistic and cultural programmes in the country. Throughout 2023, 100 women cultural professionals also acquired 
knowledge about economic and labour rights for artists, fair contracts, Intellectual Property, resource mobilization and 
protection from gender-based violence.
Meanwhile, the Pan-African Network for Artistic Freedom (PANAF) is an initiative that advocates for freedom of artistic 
expression across the creative sector. It aims to provide an inclusive platform for organizations, artists and culture producers 
and promote safe and enabling environments for artistic creativity. PANAF was founded by Selam, a non-profit cultural 
organization headquartered in Sweden with offices in Ethiopia and Kenya, and is supported by the Swedish Arts Council’s 
Programme for Artistic Freedom and the Swedish Institute. 
In recent years, PANAF has assessed artistic freedom in eight African countries (Ethiopia, Gambia, Kenya, Mozambique, 
Nigeria, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia), analysing the current situation and formulating policy recommendations. At the 
national level, their research enables civil society and policy makers to establish policy dialogues, while at the international 
level, it facilitates peer learning, networking and dialogue. These processes were brought together at the second PANAF 
Summit, held in Zanzibar in February 2025. 
Source: Gambia QPR, 2023; Uganda QPR, 2023; UNESCO, 2023a; PANAF, 2025 
Concrete mechanisms to safeguard artistic freedom
Effective institutional safeguards are indispensable for 
translating legal recognition of artistic freedom into practice. 
The main responsibility for safeguarding artistic freedom 
lies with the governments, which may reinforce it through 
the establishment of monitoring mechanisms, registries, 
complaint procedures and other means. National institutions 
such as independent national human rights institutions, 
ombudsperson offices and cultural observatories play an 
important role in documenting violations and facilitating 
redress. However, the status of this right is impacted by an 
interdependent network of governments, intergovernmental 
organizations, the UN and regional human rights bodies and 
mechanisms, and civil society organizations.
Recent examples of good practices highlight how 
safeguards are being developed across regions, initiated 
either by governments or by civil society organizations. 
At the governmental level, in Greece, Law 5039/2023 
(Articles 107-108) established a national Registry of 
Employed Persons in Culture, enabling the government to 
track employment conditions and extend labour and social 
protections to cultural workers. In Namibia, the Ministry 
of Education, Arts and Culture commissioned a report to 
strengthen the monitoring of artistic freedom and provide 
recommendations to improve its protection and promotion; 
the Ministry also organized a public dialogue to catalyse 
collective efforts to integrate social protection mechanisms 
into the cultural and creative sector. Moreover, the National 
Arts Council led an extensive consultation process to revise 
the draft National Arts Fund Act and develop its supporting 
regulations, in order to contribute to a more inclusive and 
supportive environment for artists in the country.
Other initiatives are led by civil society organizations, 
some operating in partnership with government and 
others addressing institutional shortcomings in the 
protection of artistic freedom. In Indonesia, Koalisi Seni, 
a national coalition of artists and cultural organizations, 
has established a nationwide Artistic Freedom Monitoring 
System that systematically records violations, with support 
from the UNESCO International Fund for Cultural Diversity 
and the UNESCO-Aschberg Programme, creating one of the 
few dedicated mechanisms in Asia (Koalisi Seni, 2025a).
214
Box 10.2 • The vera* Trust Centre in Austria
Established in 2022, vera* is an independent trust 
centre created to support individuals affected by 
violence, harassment and abuse of power in the 
arts, culture and sports sectors. Operated by two 
independent organizations with support from the 
Federal Ministry for Housing, Arts, Culture, Media 
and Sport, the centre provides psychological and 
legal counselling, offers guidance on possible courses 
of action, and acts as a central point of contact for 
those who perceive themselves as victims of power 
abuse. Ensuring low-threshold access is a core priority, 
alongside coordination with existing support services, 
political institutions and administrative bodies. Beyond 
individual assistance, vera* also develops workshops, 
awareness-raising initiatives and structural measures 
aimed at fostering safer working environments in 
cultural and artistic fields.
Source: Austria QPR, 2024
protection in Malawi, South Africa, Uganda, Zambia and 
Zimbabwe. The organization strengthened the capacities of 
local PEN Centres, supported authors in each target country 
to produce articles on writers’ contributions to society and 
the challenges they face, and fostered public dialogue 
around the themes emerging from these pieces. 
Collectively, these developments point to a global shift from 
declarative guarantees to operational mechanisms that 
embed artistic freedom in law, practice and institutional 
culture. Yet, the reach and effectiveness of these mechanisms 
vary widely across regions, an issue explored in the next 
section on key challenges.
KEY CHALLENGES TO FREEDOM OF 
ARTISTIC EXPRESSION IN A SHIFTING 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT
Freedom of artistic expression is today threatened by 
several major – and often interconnected – political, 
technological and economic factors, including legal and 
political repression, armed conflict, digital threats and socio-
economic pressures. Taken together, these challenges call for 
differentiated and evolving forms of protection. 
In this regard, this section examines three specific challenges: 
first, protecting artists that experience displacement and 
exile, and supporting them for their sustainable reintegration; 
second, addressing legal constraints and under-enforcement; 
and third, adapting protection frameworks to unregulated 
digital environments. While Parties to the 2005 Convention 
and civil society actors have piloted effective responses, many 
initiatives remain fragile and disconnected from broader 
policy systems.
Displacement, exile and sustainable reintegration
By the end of 2024, a record 123.2 million people 
worldwide were forcibly displaced, including 73.5 million 
internally displaced persons (UNHCR, 2025a, 2025b). While 
it is not possible to determine how many of these individuals 
are artists or cultural professionals, even a small proportion 
would amount to tens of thousands of practitioners whose 
livelihoods and freedoms are directly affected.
In contexts marked by political unrest, armed conflict and 
mass displacement, artists face escalating risks to their safety 
and freedom of expression. Since 2020, responses to protect 
artistic freedom have expanded in scope and scale, driven by 
the COVID-19 pandemic shock to cultural infrastructures and 
subsequent crises in Afghanistan, Ukraine and the Gaza Strip, 
as well as by intensified crackdowns on rights and freedoms 
in several other countries.
In Germany, the Themis Advice Centre operates as a sector-
wide counselling and complaints mechanism for sexual 
harassment and violence in the performing arts and audio-
visual fields, offering confidential support and pathways to 
remedy such problems. Another relevant example is that of 
the vera* Trust Centre in Austria (Box 10.2). 
Awareness-raising and capacity-building initiatives can also 
contribute to establishing protections and safeguarding 
artistic freedom. In Malawi, for instance, the National 
Commission for UNESCO organized a series of Artistic 
Freedom Workshops in 2021 and 2023 to train government 
officials, artists and civil society actors on international 
standards and national frameworks. In Ghana, the National 
Commission on Culture led a comprehensive training 
programme to empower artists with a deeper understanding 
of the cultural, policy and legal aspects that shape their 
work, and engaged them in consultation processes related to 
regulatory reforms affecting them. Civil society organizations 
also play a critical role in this area. In Africa, for instance, 
Ikirenga Art and Culture Promotion in Rwanda led research 
and advocacy to raise awareness of the importance of 
artistic freedom and to promote institutional reforms to 
enable it. The organization also trained artists on relevant 
legal frameworks, digital security, business skills and self-
care for their mental health and well-being. In Angola, the 
Association for the Defense of Women and Peoples provided 
artists with access to information about their rights and 
with targeted legal support. At the subregional level, PEN 
International promoted artistic freedom, raised awareness on 
the critical role of writers, and advocated for their enhanced 
215
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
These pressures have required not only immediate protection 
but also credible pathways to long-term professional 
development, whether in host countries where artists and 
cultural professionals have relocated, or where possible, 
through supported returns to their home countries.
Across the 2017-2020 and 2021-2024 periods, all regions 
recorded an overall increase in the share of Parties reporting 
initiatives developed or supported by public authorities to 
protect exiled or at-risk artists. While still far from sufficient, 
this progress led to a global increase from 27% to 37%. 
Western Europe and North America reported the highest 
percentage, at 62%, alongside notable increases of 
15 percentage points in Latin America and the Caribbean 
and 14 percentage points in Eastern Europe (Figure 10.2). 
Figure 10.2
Proportion of Parties reporting initiatives to protect 
artists at risk or in exile which have been developed 
or supported by public authorities during the last 
four years, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
33%
14%
11%
14%
36%
57%
27%
43%
25%
15%
29%
50%
62%
37%
The rise is most visible in temporary relocation schemes, 
emergency stipends, residency pathways, legal and 
psychosocial support, and reintegration programmes. 
Emergency measures are typically the first line of response, 
covering relocation or safe housing, stipends, residencies, 
legal aid and psychosocial support. Austria’s Office Ukraine 
Shelter (2022-2024) connected nearly 2,000 Ukrainian 
artists and family members to host institutions and 
residencies. Germany’s Goethe-Institut in Exile opened 
safe spaces for Afghan and Iranian artists. Meanwhile, the 
International Cities of Refuge Network, which connects over 
80 cities in Europe, the United States and Latin America, 
continues to embed artists at risk within municipalities via 
city-level hosting. 
Civil society organizations have played a pivotal role in 
initiatives that provide emergency support. For example, 
the Ukrainian Emergency Art Fund, established by the 
Museum of Contemporary Art (MOCA NGO), the media 
outlet Zaborona, the art gallery the Naked Room and 
flagship public national museum Mystetskyi Arsenal, rapidly 
channelled emergency assistance to nearly 900 artists 
in 2022-2023. Moreover, with funding from UNESCO’s 
Heritage Emergency Fund and the UNESCO-Aschberg 
Programme, between 2022 and 2024, MOCA NGO 
supported the creative projects of 21 Ukrainian cultural 
institutions, which contributed to artists’ livelihoods and the 
continuation of cultural life in the country. 
Finland-based Artists at Risk coordinates emergency 
relocation, housing, and professional and psychological 
support for artists in danger, mostly in collaboration with 
European municipalities and host institutions through 
the Artists at Risk European Network of Safe Havens, but 
also in other regions. With more than 330 host partners, 
Artists at Risk has supported over 1 ,100 artists from around 
the world. For example, with support from UNESCO’s 
Heritage Emergency Fund and the Aschberg Programme, 
the organization provided safe artistic residencies for 
38 Ukrainian women artists (and their dependents) across 
13 European countries in 2022, and for 57 internally 
displaced Ukrainian artists and cultural professionals in 
13 Ukrainian hosting institutions in safer areas of the country 
in 2023. Artists at Risk also curated an Artists at Risk Pavilion, 
hosted from April to May 2024 by the UNESCO Regional 
Bureau for Science and Culture in Europe, on the sidelines of 
the 60th Venice Biennale. The Pavilion exhibited artworks by 
ten artists hailing from different crisis-affected regions. 
Meanwhile, another civil society organization, Artists at Risk 
Connection, is dedicated to protecting artists and cultural 
professionals around the world, including by connecting 
them to relocation programmes, providing them with tools 
and guidance to navigate emergency financial aid for urgent 
needs and issuing resilience grants. 
216
These efforts illustrate the urgency and flexibility required 
when artists face acute repression, violence or exile. To raise 
awareness about these challenges, Artists at Risk Connection, 
UNESCO and the Permanent Mission of Norway to the UN 
held a high-level event at the UN Headquarters in New York in 
April 2024. The international network On the Move has also 
established a working group on At-Risk and Displaced Arts 
Workers, gathering 17 public and civil society organizations 
that operate in this field, to share practices and advocacy tools 
and to raise awareness about related issues. 
Several programmes also target reintegration. Germany’s 
Culture Helping Culture supports Ukrainian refugee artists 
through mentorship, performances and residencies. In 
Jordan, the Al Balad Theatre has been building professional 
capacities and regional collaboration for refugee artists 
since 2016. France’s Agency of Artists in Exile, another civil 
society organization, offers studio space and professional 
development to artists from dozens of countries. In Greece, 
Multaka Athens engages migrants and refugees as 
museum guides, strengthening cultural participation and 
employability in the heritage and museum sector. 
Offering relocation to safe locations within artists’ own 
countries or region is often preferable, as it supports easier 
adaptation to a new setting, access to audiences and peer 
networks, and greater cost-effectiveness. The ‘Stand with 
Sudanese Artists’ initiative, implemented by Action for Hope 
and Culture Resource (Al-Mawred Al-Thaqafy), with support 
from international, regional and local partners including 
UNESCO, provided emergency financial assistance for 
displaced Sudanese artists to relocate and resume their work 
in safer localities both within the country and abroad. It also 
supported the setup of the Wasel (which means ‘connection’ 
in Arabic) Culture Hub in Port Sudan, coordinated by the 
Portive Cultural Center. The hub provides a safe work and 
meeting space as well as networking platform for displaced 
Sudanese artists, allowing them to continue their creative 
production, discuss common challenges, develop new skills 
and interact with the local community. 
Despite the increase in reported efforts to support artists’ 
temporary relocation, provide emergency financial, legal and 
psychological assistance, and facilitate artists’ integration into 
their host communities, responses remain fragmented and 
time-limited, constrained by limited resources at the national 
level and often dependent on short-term donor funding. These 
constraints underscore the fragility of existing initiatives 
and the need for more durable frameworks. Stronger policy 
anchoring, diaspora engagement and regional coordination 
are needed to align emergency measures with sustainable 
reintegration and broader cultural policy frameworks. This 
challenge links directly to the following section on legal 
repression and the under-enforcement of existing protective 
laws, policies and measures.
Censorship through legal frameworks 
and gaps in protection
Censorship through legal frameworks remains one of the 
greatest threats to artistic freedom. Some countries retain or 
misuse laws on blasphemy, defamation, terrorism or ‘public 
morality’ to suppress expression and intimidate artists. 
The deterrent effect of foreign agent laws on artists and 
cultural institutions has also emerged as a trend in recent 
years. Gaps in protection exist when artists face attacks 
and threats from organized crime, as well as repression and 
violence during times of protest – risks that are notably 
heightened during election periods (Freemuse, 2025). 
Evidence shows that a large majority of countries in the 
world have legal frameworks aligned with the goals of 
the 2005 Convention in the field of freedom of artistic 
expression. As previously noted (Figure 10.1), Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports data submitted by Parties between 2021 
and 2024 show that 90% reported that their constitution 
and/or national regulatory frameworks recognize the right of 
artists to create without censorship or intimidation, and 94% 
reported that these frameworks recognize the right of artists 
to disseminate and perform their work. Yet, even where strong 
legal frameworks exist, implementation and remedy often lag 
behind, as the following sections will argue.
In many contexts, censorship and repression persist, yet 
Parties lack systematic monitoring systems and reliable 
official data to document these violations. The absence of 
reliable public monitoring systems leaves violations invisible 
in official records and creates significant gaps in protection. 
Civil society organizations have therefore assumed a critical 
role in documenting restrictions, producing independent 
data that both exposes ongoing repression and highlights 
these gaps to operationalize legal commitments. 
As of 2024, 61% of Parties reported having independent 
bodies to monitor violations of artistic freedom, up from 53% 
in the previous cycle. The greatest increases were seen in the 
Arab States and Asia and the Pacific, with increases of 33 
percentage points (from 45% to 78%) and 21 points (from 
33% to 54%) (Figure 10.3). It is noteworthy that there was 
a 7 percentage point decline in Western European and North 
American States. Civil society organizations and networks are 
considered indispensable to this ecosystem, often filling gaps 
left by governments. In Asia, for instance, ArtsEquator built 
the Southeast Asian Arts Censorship Database (2025), the 
first of its kind, documenting over 600 cases of censorship 
between 2010 and 2022 across several countries in the 
region. Incidents ranged from bans and prosecutions to 
intimidation, gatekeeping and self-censorship. These diverse 
approaches to limit artistic freedom create a climate of fear 
that produces a significant chilling effect, particularly in 
politically sensitive media such as film and publishing. 
217
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
Figure 10.3
Proportion of Parties reporting independent bodies 
are established to receive complaints and/or monitor 
violations and restrictions to artistic freedom, by region
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
In Latin America, the Bogotá-based Fundación Cartel Urbano 
produced The State of Artistic Freedom of Expression in Latin 
America report (2022-2023). In Africa, in addition to the 
assessments undertaken by the Pan-African Network for 
Artistic Freedom (Box 10.1), Zimbabwe-based Nhimbe Trust 
also documented violations and published a regional report 
advocating stronger protections (Nhimbe Trust, 2023). 
At the global level, the ‘Building Bridges – Breaking Barriers’ 
project led by Freemuse facilitated the consolidation of 
a global network of partner organizations engaged in 
monitoring and advocating for artistic freedom. The initiative 
brought together a diverse group of organizations with 
regional and thematic expertise, to facilitate collaboration 
and knowledge exchange across different contexts. This 
resulted in contributions to Freemuse’s The State of Artistic 
Freedom global reports and to the UN Universal Periodic 
Review process concerning several countries, combining 
Freemuse’s expertise on UN mechanisms with on-the-ground 
insights from regional partners. 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Global total
African States
45%
48%
33%
47%
59%
75%
53%
78%
64%
54%
48%
58%
68%
61%
The 2023 Safe Havens Freedom Talks Conference held in 
Athens, preceded by ‘garden sessions’ that allowed artists 
to carry out in-depth discussions, represented a key forum 
to identify the gaps, resources and needs in the global 
support system for artists who are at risk, which provided 
input into the development of a hyperlinked map made 
available on the Safe Havens Freedom Talks website 
(Safe Havens Freedom Talks, 2025). By making patterns 
of censorship visible, these initiatives provide evidence for 
advocacy, international accountability and policy reform, 
underscoring the indispensable role of civil society in 
safeguarding artistic freedom.
Box 10.3 •  Center for the Analysis of Liberty 
and Authoritarianism’s Emergency 
Agenda (2019-2022)
In Brazil, the Center for the Analysis of Liberty and 
Authoritarianism (LAUT) has developed a civil-society-
driven complaints and monitoring mechanism, seeking 
to identify the risks to freedom and democracy within 
the country, including restrictions on artistic freedom. 
The Center is an independent, non-partisan research 
institution funded by private and foundation donations. 
Through its Emergency Agenda (2019-2022), it 
documented 80 cases of censorship of artistic freedom, 
capturing actions by a wide range of state and non-state 
actors. Though non-exhaustive, the database provided 
systematic weekly updates, highlighting how restrictions 
on artistic freedom are embedded in broader formal 
and informal acts that damage or put at risk democracy 
and freedoms.
The artistic freedom component of the Emergency 
Agenda was curated by MOBILE, the Brazilian 
Integrated Movement for Freedom of Artistic Expression, 
a network of entities and collectives that work to 
defend and promote artistic freedom of expression in 
the country. MOBILE is coordinated by ARTIGO 19 and 
342 Artes, in partnership with LAUT, Rede Liberdade, 
Artigo Quinto and Mídia NINJA. The cases featured 
on LAUT’s Emergency Agenda Platform were selected 
from among the 280 incidents documented between 
2019 and 2022 on MOBILE’s platform, which focuses 
specifically on restrictions on artistic freedom. The 
MOBILE platform includes a form allowing the public 
to report violations of artistic freedom; it also features 
information and tools to help users identify different 
types of violations and access legal support. 
Source: Brazil QPR, 2024; LAUT, 2025; MOBILE, 2025
218
Recent geopolitical crises have generated new forms 
of restrictions, in which cultural and political measures 
intersect directly with artistic freedom. The ongoing armed 
conflict in the Gaza Strip has triggered an alarming moment 
for artistic freedom, given its direct impact on the safety 
and livelihoods of artists and cultural professionals in Gaza, 
as well as in view of the increase in reported attacks and 
restrictions in countries traditionally regarded as strong 
defenders of human rights and fundamental freedoms. In 
this regard, several UN Special Rapporteurs, including the 
Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights, issued a 
joint statement in November 2023 expressing alarm at the 
attacks, reprisals, criminalization and sanctions against 
individuals, including artists, who publicly voiced solidarity 
with the victims of the conflict. They noted the pressures 
artists faced to change the subjects of their creative work, 
as well as cases in which artists were accused of being 
‘troublemakers’ or ‘indifferent to the suffering of one side 
or the other’, lost their jobs, were excluded from artistic 
programming, or were censored because of their calls for 
peace (OHCHR, 2023).
Meanwhile, cultural boycotts against Russian artists 
following the invasion in Ukraine in February 2022 have 
also generated significant debate about the impact of 
politicized decision making on cultural rights. Numerous 
cultural institutions, festivals, competitions and orchestras 
unilaterally terminated engagements with Russian artists 
solely on the basis of their nationality. A white paper 
published by Avant-Garde Lawyers (2022) highlights 
how such exclusions, though often intended as symbolic 
condemnation of state actions, in practice penalized 
individual artists. The report warns that normalizing 
exclusionary measures in times of geopolitical conflict 
risks creates a precedent where artists are targeted for 
their identities rather than their work, undermining the 
universality of artistic freedom.
While cultural boycotts may reflect collective geopolitical 
dynamics, the use of strategic lawsuits against public 
participation (SLAPPs) to curb artistic freedom operates 
through individualized legal harassment. These cases – 
frequently filed by powerful actors such as public bodies or 
officials, high-profile individuals or companies, on baseless, 
frivolous or exaggerated grounds – are often initiated not 
with the expectation of winning in court, but to intimidate 
and silence their targets by exhausting them financially 
and psychologically. 
Growing concerns about SLAPPs have, for instance, 
been reflected in the passing of an anti-SLAPP Directive 
by the European Parliament and the Council of the 
European Union, and the adoption of a Recommendation 
on countering the use of SLAPPs by the Committee of 
Ministers of the Council of Europe in 2024. 
Furthermore, the Inter-American Commission on Human 
Rights held its first public hearing on the issue in 2023, 
and in 2024 it opened a consultation to gather input for 
producing a dedicated thematic report on the subject. 
At the country level, and in support of the Critical Voices 
project spearheaded by the Permanent Delegation 
of the Kingdom of Denmark to UNESCO, the Danish 
Union of Journalists and the Danish Actors’ Association 
brought together artists, journalists and scientists at 
the Folkemødet 2022 Festival to raise awareness of 
common risks they face; they have also begun establishing 
monitoring units in the country to gather the data needed 
to respond to trends and specific attacks, such as SLAPPs. 
While boycotts and SLAPPs operate through different 
mechanisms, both may generate legal and social pressures 
that deter artists from exercising their rights, often leading 
to self-censorship and withdrawal from public discourse, with 
intimidation and reputational risk discouraging them from 
pursuing sensitive themes. 
The legal threats, pressures and gaps in protection that 
continue to affect artists underscore the urgent need 
for accessible legal support and specialized defence 
mechanisms. Independent organizations, including 
Avant-Garde Lawyers and the Artistic Freedom Initiative, 
provide this expertise by assisting artists in navigating 
domestic and international procedures. Yet, the scale of 
available support remains far below the demand. Also 
relevant is to build capacities among judicial and legal 
actors to protect artistic freedom. In this regard, the Forum 
for Humor and the Law, ForHum, was created in 2022 
to serve as a platform for lawyers, scholars, artists and 
other stakeholders interested in the relationship between 
humour, free expression and the law. Its website features 
a peer-reviewed blog, a resource library and a database 
of legal cases related to humour and satire from around 
the world. Together with Columbia Global Freedom 
of Expression, ForHum published a toolkit to support 
the judiciary and other relevant actors in the protection 
of humour and satire as critical forms of democratic 
expression (Godioli et al., 2025).
In addition to the more overt forms of censorship and 
intimidation, several informal pressures and ‘under the radar’ 
threats also restrict freedom of artistic expression. These 
may include government pressure on cultural institutions 
and artists, excluding them from support or opportunities 
because of their political viewpoints or their identity (gender, 
ethnicity, etc.), and administrative restrictions applied 
more harshly on some cultural expressions than others 
(for example, health and safety regulations, or denial of 
production and presentation spaces) (Whyatt, 2023). One 
particular challenge concerns the difficulties in monitoring 
this set of pressures, since they tend to be less explicit.
219
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
Taken together, these dynamics show that while some 
progress has been made through reforms and independent 
monitoring, the persistence of outdated statutes, informal 
pressures and insufficient access to legal defence continues 
to undermine artistic freedom. Addressing this gap requires 
not only repealing restrictive laws but also strengthening 
judicial independence, building institutional capacity and 
ensuring specialized legal support, so that recognition in law 
is matched by real and enforceable protection in practice.
Digital governance and unregulated threats
Digital environments have become essential for artists 
to reach audiences, build networks and express ideas. 
But the same systems that offer visibility can also expose 
artists to new risks, including automated moderation 
(the removal of content without human review), digital 
surveillance and algorithmic bias (systematic distortions 
in training data leading to unequal treatment of content), 
as well as orchestrated disinformation and misinformation 
campaigns, hate speech and public mobilization targeting 
artists. These threats disproportionately affect artists 
from marginalized communities, particularly women and 
LGBTIQ+ creators, whose content is more often flagged as 
inappropriate or controversial.
Measures specifically addressing artistic freedom in 
digital environments remain limited globally, reported 
by fewer than one-third of countries in the latest 
global consultation on the implementation of the 
1980 Recommendation. In the absence of comprehensive 
state responses, civil society has played a leading role. 
According to this consultation, around half of participating 
non-governmental organizations and international non-
governmental organizations reported initiatives aimed 
at helping artists navigate digital challenges or harness 
new opportunities. These types of initiatives train artists 
in platform navigation, document content takedowns, and 
advocate for transparency in algorithmic decision making. 
For example, Don’t Delete Art – a coalition of artist-
activists, art collectors and human rights organizations – 
has helped inform artists about the risks they face and how 
they can take advantage of the new possibilities opened by 
the digital environment. In November 2025, the pro bono 
art and law organization Lawyers for the Creative Arts, 
together with the National Coalition Against Censorship (a 
federation of nearly 60 American non-profit organizations 
dedicated to the promotion and defence of the First 
Amendment right), held a webinar on ‘Tactics to Avoid 
Art Censorship Online’. Another Don’t Delete Art member, 
Artists at Risk Connection, produced a safety guide for 
artists that includes modules on cybersecurity (ARC, 2021) 
and delivered digital safety training for artists, including 
through a workshop at UNESCO’s 2022 World Press 
Freedom Day celebration in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in 
collaboration with UNESCO and the Central American 
Educational and Cultural Coordination, which gathered 
artists and cultural professionals, civil society and 
government representatives from Central America and 
Uruguay. Yet, most existing efforts equipping artists to 
face digital challenges remain project-based, reactive and 
vulnerable to political and platform shifts. 
The consequences of the regulatory vacuum on artistic 
freedom, and other fundamental freedoms, in the 
digital space are evident in corporate governance. The 
company Meta’s January 2025 moderation changes, 
removing fact-checking requirements and loosening 
hate speech rules, prompted widespread concern 
from civil society. ARTICLE 19, an international non-
governmental organization actively working on freedom 
of expression, warned that this could result in unchecked 
harmful content, especially affecting vulnerable groups 
(ARTICLE 19, 2025). While the European Union’s Digital 
Services Act (2022) represents one attempt at systemic 
accountability, such frameworks remain rare. Beyond 
platform rules, digital surveillance has become a key tool 
for repression. Even after fleeing their home country, artists 
can continue to be targeted via spyware and harassed 
online. Freemuse (2022) documents how prosecutions 
under digital security laws are now one of the fastest-
growing forms of silencing artists. These practices blur 
legal enforcement and intimidation, creating a chilling 
effect that silences artists before formal censorship occurs.
The rise of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) adds 
further complexity. AI can be used to create deepfakes 
and non-consensual content to harass, humiliate or coerce 
artists into silence. From the perspective of socio-economic 
rights, by training AI models based on artists’ work 
and reproducing it without consent, GenAI undermines 
copyright and authorship, and complicates equitable 
remuneration. Different regions are beginning to regulate 
in divergent ways: the European Union’s AI Act imposes 
transparency, the United States’ approach relies largely 
on courts and fair use, and China requires licensing of 
training data. No coherent international framework has yet 
emerged, leaving protection for artists fragmented.
In her 2025 report on AI and creativity, the UN Special 
Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights, Alexandra 
Xanthaki, warned that while several international 
declarations acknowledge the human rights implications 
of AI, they have not been translated into concrete action 
and frequently fail to address the impact of AI on cultural 
rights. She urged governments to recognize the many ways 
in which the use of AI can erode human creativity and to 
demonstrate political will to address violations of cultural 
rights linked to its use. 
220
Among her recommendations were to adopt measures 
that ensure the recognition and visibility of works created 
by humans and to strengthen the ability of individual and 
collective authors to retain control over how their data are 
collected, stored, used and shared in AI systems. Governments 
should also strengthen regulations that protect right holders’ 
moral and material interests when their works are used 
to train AI models, and ensure that clear accountability 
mechanisms are in place to identify and address harms 
caused by AI systems in creative contexts (Xanthaki, 2025). 
Against this backdrop, some governments and civil 
society actors have begun to experiment with policy and 
governance innovations that address the intersection 
of AI, artistic freedom and cultural policy. Countries 
have also introduced measures that explicitly address 
artistic freedom in the digital environment. According 
to the 1980 Recommendation consultation, 27% of 
developing and 19% of developed countries reported 
such measures. While important, these figures remain 
low, and more progress is needed to ensure that legal and 
regulatory reforms, policies and measures are developed 
and implemented in line with international human rights 
standards, and that they advance artistic freedom rather 
than unduly restrict it. 
An example of a reform that strengthens creators’ ability to 
negotiate fairer terms is Sweden’s transposition, in 2023, of 
the European Union Directive on Copyright in the Digital 
Single Market into Swedish law. The amendments introduced 
to the country’s legislation impose licensing obligations 
on content-sharing platforms and improve transparency in 
connection to artists’ remuneration. The initiative provides 
a legislative model for copyright in platform-dominated 
markets, anticipating challenges from algorithmic 
moderation and AI-generated content.
Complementing government-led efforts, civil society initiatives 
offer counterbalances to unregulated digital power. In 2023, 
the Latin American Civil Society Alliance for Fair Access 
to Knowledge produced a study analysing the impact of 
copyright law on the development of AI across 19 Latin 
American countries. The report highlighted asymmetries 
between the countries where AI development and use is 
majorly concentrated and Latin American contexts, noting 
how restrictive copyright frameworks risk hindering local 
innovation. It also presented a model legal text for potential 
adoption by Latin American States. This study is relevant as 
it frames AI not only as a copyright challenge but also as 
an opportunity to strengthen local cultural production and 
the work of cultural professionals. By situating AI within 
cultural policy debates, it emphasizes the need for inclusive 
frameworks that ensure digital environments support, rather 
than undermine, the creative sectors in the wider region (Díaz 
Charquero and Rangel, 2023).
To encourage reflection on the critical use of AI by 
stakeholders in the cultural and creative industries, in 
August 2025, FUTURX – a research and development 
centre in Argentina focused on the intersection of music, 
technology and internet culture – and the UNESCO 
Regional Office in Montevideo, organized a panel 
discussion. It focused on the development of protocols 
to facilitate cultural organizations’ decision making 
when faced with common challenges posed by AI, 
preventing abuses and protecting copyright, guaranteeing 
transparency and trust, and protecting and strengthening 
cultural diversity (UNESCO, 2025b). 
In New Zealand, Te Hiku Media, a M āori broadcasting and 
digital organization, is developing culturally grounded 
speech-recognition tools to preserve language sovereignty 
and embed Indigenous data ethics. In Canada, the 
Anishinaabe-led Biskaabiiyaang metaverse project fosters 
Indigenous storytelling through decentralized digital tools. 
In Ethiopia, Gerar – The Creative Hub implemented a 
project aimed at equipping women visual artists to thrive 
in the digital age, by enhancing their skills to manage their 
digital presence effectively, boosting their market reach 
and career prospects. 
Together, these examples show both the effectiveness 
of rights-based, culturally grounded frameworks for 
digital governance, as well as the potential of artist- and 
community-led governance models and the importance 
of empowering artists so that they are not left behind in 
the digital era. For lasting protection, governments should 
not only regulate platforms and AI in accordance with 
international human rights standards, but also scale up 
and support such models to build resilient protections for 
artistic freedom in the digital age.
SUPPORTING THE ARTIST: BUILDING 
STABILITY THROUGH GUARANTEEING 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC RIGHTS
Artists globally face significant economic and social 
challenges that are intensified by crises such as the 
COVID-19 pandemic, global inflation and political shifts. 
These conditions expose long-standing vulnerabilities 
within the cultural and creative sector, including precarious 
legal status, fragmented funding structures, insufficient 
social protection, and disparities in equity and Intellectual 
Property rights. Effective responses require comprehensive 
institutional frameworks informed by civil society insights, 
expert reflections and legislative innovations, supported by 
clear statistical evidence.
221
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
Institutional initiatives to advance 
artists’ socio-economic rights
During the 2021-2024 period, several Parties to the 
Convention introduced or strengthened measures that take 
the professional status of artists into account, reflecting a 
broader trend towards expanding protections for cultural 
workers. Indeed, while in 2017-2020 only 40% of reporting 
Parties referred to having such social protection measures, 
the figure rose to 74% in 2021-2024 (Figure 10.4). The 
progress was observed in both developed (from 58% to 
90%) and developing countries (from 30% to 66%), 
although there remain differences across regions, with the 
highest percentage registered in Eastern Europe (100%) and 
the lowest in Africa (59%). The increase in initiatives in this 
field was likely driven by temporary support measures during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, which raised awareness of the 
precarious working and socio-economic conditions for artists 
and cultural professionals. 
Figure 10.4
Proportion of Parties having adopted or revised 
social protection measures that take the professional 
status of artists into account in the last four years, by 
developing and developed countries 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
To support this overall progress, several countries have 
introduced new regulations or updated existing frameworks. 
Lithuania amended its programme for the social protection 
of artists between 2020 and 2022, expanding access to 
creative downtime payments during states of emergency 
and mobilizing additional funds to cover social security and 
health insurance contributions. Other examples in Europe 
include Belgium’s reforms in support of artists’ social status 
through the creation of an arts labour commission and 
the issuing of arts work certificates to improve their social 
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
58%
30%
40%
90%
66%
74%
protection (effective from 2024) (Valais, 2025), Portugal’s 
Decree Law on the Statute of Professionals in the Cultural 
Area (effective from 2022), and Romania’s approval of the 
Emergency Ordinance No. 21/2023 regarding the Status 
of the professional cultural worker (2023). In Africa, Cabo 
Verde adopted a law on the status of the artist in 2025, 
while Djibouti and Mozambique developed draft legislation 
in this area. In Seychelles, a process of consultations and a 
baseline study on the socio-economic protection of artists 
and the related legislative gaps were also conducted to 
pave the way towards a law on the status of the artist. In 
Senegal, where a law on the status of the artist and cultural 
professionals came into force in 2021 , the Directorate 
of Arts, Ministry of Culture and Historical Heritage has 
encouraged cultural stakeholders to take greater ownership, 
in particular by facilitating their active involvement in 
finalizing and validating the law’s implementing texts, and 
raising awareness about it. In turn, following the adoption of 
a status of the artist decree in 2021 , Côte d’Ivoire launched 
a process to develop another decree setting the conditions 
and modalities for the granting of a professional artist card. 
In Malawi, following the adoption of the National Arts and 
Heritage Bill in 2024 – which will mobilize and disburse 
funds to artists and cultural practitioners to support the 
development of the cultural and creative industries – a 
participatory process was facilitated to develop the rules, 
regulations and implementation procedures of the National 
Arts and Heritage Promotion Fund.
In the Arab region, through Presidential Decree No. 23-376, 
Algeria has formalized the professional status of artists and 
introduced legal guarantees for access to social protection 
and economic rights. Complementing this, Algeria’s Ministry 
of Culture has promoted inclusive policies and support 
schemes such as retirement pensions and social security 
mechanisms tailored to artists. These efforts are further 
reinforced by its national copyright office, mandated to 
safeguard Intellectual Property and the economic rights 
of creators. Despite challenges in the implementation of 
these reforms, they illustrate the potential of combining 
national legislation with practical support infrastructure. 
In Tunisia, the Ministry of Cultural Affairs implemented a 
series of consultations with artists and cultural professionals, 
aimed at refining the draft law on the status of the artist, 
facilitating its endorsement and concrete implementation, as 
well as informing the elaboration of the related decree-laws. 
Capacity building was also delivered to the national and 
local institutions that will implement and monitor the new 
law once it is adopted.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the Chilean Ministry 
of Cultures, Arts and Heritage spearheaded advances in the 
decent cultural work agenda, including by coordinating an 
Interministerial Committee set up for this purpose, as well 
as through research, dialogue and awareness-raising actions. 
222
career (that is, a combination of work as employed and 
self-employed) in the performing arts. For the first time, it 
provided quantitative and qualitative data on their working 
conditions, generating wide public, academic and policy 
interest. Its findings highlighted precariousness, gaps in 
social protection, and the need for systemic reform. The 
project produced policy recommendations to improve social 
security systems for creative professionals, positioned artists’ 
organizations as relevant policy partners and encouraged 
reforms that could also benefit other sectors. 
In Slovenia, in the wake of the effects of the COVID-19 
pandemic, the Poligon Creative Centre conducted a unique 
three-year longitudinal study funded by the Slovenian 
Centre for Creativity that surveyed over 4,400 respondents, 
representing more than 10% of the national workforce 
in the cultural and creative sector. Results showed the 
pandemic exacerbated pre-existing problems, such as 
chronic precarity and low income. It concluded that 
only systemic reform, not temporary crisis measures, 
can address these challenges in Slovenia’s cultural and 
creative industries.
Facilitating data collection and research to inform robust 
laws, policies and measures to enhance the status of the 
artist is one of the key areas of support provided by the 
UNESCO-Aschberg Programme. Research on the conditions 
of artists and cultural professionals with a view to enhancing 
related regulatory frameworks was produced under 
government-led projects in Madagascar and Uganda, as 
well as in Mongolia, where it focused on the film industry. 
Efforts were accompanied by awareness-raising and 
capacity-building actions. 
In turn, the Dominican Republic launched ARTSECURE, a 
project aimed at developing a comprehensive social security 
framework tailored to artists and the cultural sector. Led by 
the Ministry of Culture and supported by UNESCO and the 
European Union, the initiative seeks to improve artists’ and 
cultural workers’ access to social and labour rights, reduce 
the vulnerability caused by informality, and strengthen the 
creative economy.
There have also been concrete actions at the regional 
level. For example, the European Parliament has called 
for the establishment of a European framework for artists’ 
working conditions; the Culture Compass for Europe 
states that the European Commission will propose a 
European Union Artists Charter. Moreover, as a result 
of a sustained collaborative process spearheaded by 
UNESCO, the International Labour Organization and the 
African Union, 29 African Union member states validated 
the joint CREATE Programme in April 2025. It promotes 
decent work in the cultural and creative economy across 
the region. Furthermore, the Council of Ministers of 
Culture of the Central American Educational and Cultural 
Coordination adopted a Regional Policy for the Promotion 
and Protection of Artists and Cultural Workers in Central 
America (Box 10.4).
As in other policy areas, developments in this field need 
supporting data, and some initiatives have been established 
in recent years to analyse current challenges. In Germany, 
the Systemcheck research project, implemented by the 
Federal Association for the Independent Performing Arts, 
investigated the income and social security situation of 
self-employed workers and those that have a portfolio 
Box 10.4 •  Protecting and promoting the status of the artist in Central America
The Central American Educational and Cultural Coordination led the design of a regional policy for the protection and 
promotion of the status of artists and cultural professionals in Central America, with support from the UNESCO-Aschberg 
Programme. The initiative, launched in September 2023, included the set-up of a technical committee composed of 
governmental focal points from each of the participating countries (Belize, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama) and an advisory group composed of members of civil society and the artistic 
community of each country. Based on an initial diagnosis of the condition of the artist in the SICA (Central American 
Integration System) region countries, technical support was provided for the design and implementation of national 
participatory consultations. These fed into the development of a draft regional policy, aligned with the 2005 Convention and 
the 1980 Recommendation, which was approved by the Council of Ministers of Culture of the SICA region in 2025. 
Recognizing the initiative’s impact, the Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI) approached UNESCO to request access to 
the information gathered under the initiative, as well as to the draft regional policy document guidelines and other practical 
tools developed to support the participating governments in implementing the project’s different phases. These resources 
provided key input towards the development of a policy on the status of artists and cultural workers at the Ibero-American 
level, led by the OEI with support from the Spanish Agency for International Development and in partnership with UNESCO. 
Source: UNESCO, 2024, 2023b; CECC, 2025
223
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
In the State of Palestine, an assessment of the legal 
environment was conducted to advance regulatory reforms 
favouring the establishment, operation and growth of 
cultural entrepreneurship. In Zimbabwe, a baseline study, 
supported by UNESCO and the International Labour 
Organization in the framework of an initiative led by the 
National Arts Council, provides a roadmap to support the 
transition of the cultural and creative sector from informality 
to a more structured and sustainable framework. In Peru, a 
report produced following a comprehensive and inclusive 
data collection approach as part of technical assistance 
offered to the Ministry of Culture, presents a detailed vision 
of the socio-economic, educational and labour conditions 
of cultural and art workers, and also served to improve 
the web platform of the National Registry of Workers 
and Organizations of Culture and the Arts (Rentoca). In 
Argentina, the Cultural Institute of the Province of Buenos 
Aires created a digital platform, the Cultural Information 
System of the Province of Buenos Aires, to serve as an 
observatory to monitor, gather and provide access to data on 
cultural and creative industries. The platform supports the 
design of regulatory frameworks to strengthen the creative 
sector and improve the status of artists and cultural workers. 
Several civil society-led programmes supported by 
UNESCO also advanced important research. For instance, 
the Creative Industries of Cambodia Association for 
Development and Advocacy produced, among other 
outputs, a policy paper that examines the vulnerabilities 
and untapped potential of cultural and creative industry 
workers in Cambodia, as well as the complementary Know 
Your Rights pamphlet for artists. In Yemen, the Madarat 
Cultural Organization developed a public policy paper 
analysing the legal, economic and institutional barriers 
facing the country’s creative practitioners. The paper 
serves as a basis for artist-led advocacy within a project 
focused on the two culturally active governorates of 
Hadhramaut and Aden. In Brazil, a study was conducted 
by the Instituto Pensar in collaboration with specialized 
consultancy Garimpo de Soluções on the situation of 
cultural professionals in the country, paying special 
attention to women and youth in small cities, to produce 
recommendations supporting parliamentarians in 
designing and implementing a regulatory framework for 
the creative economy that protects and promotes the status 
of the artist and cultural professionals.
Copyright frameworks are also critical for upholding artists’ 
economic rights. Recent initiatives in Ethiopia, Kenya and 
Tanzania illustrate emerging state-led efforts to strengthen 
copyright enforcement and raise awareness, though these 
measures remain uneven in scope and effectiveness. While 
these frameworks are relevant to expanding protections, 
challenges still remain around implementation capacity 
and regional harmonization.
Box 10.5 •  The Creativity and Copyright 
Association in Viet Nam
Established in 2021 under the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
the Viet Nam Creativity and Copyright Association is 
a nationwide body dedicated to copyright protection 
for literary and artistic works. Operating with legal 
status, its tasks include promoting copyright protection 
and creative development; advising authorities on 
copyright policy; organizing conferences, fairs and 
exhibitions; publishing materials and running media 
platforms to raise awareness; and fostering international 
cooperation. The Association represents a formal 
institutional mechanism for strengthening copyright 
enforcement and supporting creators, linking creative 
development with legal protection across Viet Nam.
Source: Viet Nam QPR, 2024
Regional economic initiatives also play a crucial role. The 
Creative Africa Nexus (CANEX) programme, spearheaded 
by Afreximbank, represents a substantial regional economic 
initiative aimed at addressing informality and Intellectual 
Property challenges within Africa’s creative industries. CANEX 
has committed US$2 billion between 2024 and 2027 to 
provide structured financial support to some cultural and 
creative sectors (such as film), facilitate capacity building for 
professionals, incubators and accelerators, and market access 
for cultural and creative products. With its governmental 
and civil society partners, the programme also undertakes 
high-level political advocacy to improve policy formulation 
and create an enabling regulatory and operating environment 
for creative professionals. By targeting copyright enforcement 
and formalization of creative labour, CANEX strengthens 
integration into regional and international markets 
(Afreximbank, 2024). Comparable large-scale economic 
initiatives are rare outside Africa, though there is a need for 
similar regional initiatives globally.
Transparency in public funding
Transparency in public funding remains a cornerstone of 
artists’ economic rights, but data show a gap between 
commitments and institutional practice. According to 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports data from 2021 to 2024, 87% 
of Parties reported measures and initiatives intended to 
ensure transparent decision making in state funding, grants 
and awards for artists, up from 70% in the 2017-2020 cycle. 
Developed countries reported near-universal adoption of 
such measures (100%), compared to 84% in developing 
countries, with particularly strong reporting in Eastern 
Europe, Western Europe and North America (Figure 10.5). 
224
This reflects growing policy attention to transparency as 
a guiding principle.
At the same time, observations from civil society and other 
sources highlight structural risks that these numbers alone 
cannot capture. The Fragile Triangle of Artistic Freedom  
report, for example, refers to tensions between artists’, 
civil society organizations’ and cultural organizations’ 
autonomy and funding frameworks, which often incentivize 
alignment with governments’ policy agendas and donors’ 
institutional priorities (Reitov and Whyatt, 2024). 
Dependency on funding can lead artists, civil society 
and cultural organizations towards self-censorship or 
indirectly pressure them to conform to dominant political 
narratives. Culture Action Europe in its 2025 position 
paper EU Funding for Culture in the Multiannual Financial 
Framework 2028-2034 also emphasizes that funding 
for cultural projects should respect the independence 
of organizations and uphold the right of beneficiaries 
to determine their own methods. Taken together, these 
reflections suggest that underlining transparency alone 
is insufficient: funding mechanisms must also safeguard 
pluralism and independence if they are to protect artistic 
freedom in practice.
Figure 10.5
Proportion of Parties with measures and initiatives 
intended to ensure transparent decision making 
on government funding/state grants and awards 
for artists, by developing and developed countries 
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention)
QPRs 2021-2024 QPRs 2017-2020
Developed
countries
Global total
Developing
countries
90%
60%
70%
100%
84%
87%
Equity and inclusion in access to public funds 
and other forms of support
In the section on ‘Cultural Rights as Human Rights’ of 
the MONDIACULT 2025 Conference Outcome Document, 
government representatives pledge to increase efforts 
to ensure the equitable distribution of opportunities to 
access, contribute to and benefit from culture in the face of 
persisting inequalities (UNESCO, 2025a). The effectiveness 
of this and other international commitments to equal 
access, like those enshrined in the 2005 Convention, 
ultimately depend on whether governments embed them in 
legislation and policy frameworks that respond to diverse 
social realities. 
According to the 1980 Recommendation global 
consultation, 77% of developed countries and 74% of 
developing countries reported measures and policies aimed 
to ensure gender equality in the cultural sector. However, the 
lack of gender-disaggregated data makes it difficult to assess 
the impact of such measures and policies in practice. Where 
such data are available, they tend to reveal disparities, for 
example in income levels between men and women artists, 
as highlighted in the UNESCO Empowering Creativity 
report (2023c). Targeted measures for Indigenous Peoples, 
minorities, youth and artists with disabilities remain limited 
within national cultural policies despite their relevance to 
international human rights commitments. According to the 
1980 Recommendation global consultation, only a small 
share of countries report adopting specific legal or policy 
measures for artists belonging to Indigenous communities 
(8% globally) and sexual minorities (also 8%). Support 
for youth (19%), cultural minorities (15%) and artists with 
disabilities (14%) is somewhat more common but still 
remains low (Table 10.1). In light of these deep disparities 
within the cultural sector and the way multiple forms of 
discrimination and exclusion can interact to affect some 
artists’ status, UNESCO’s Empowering Creativity report 
(2023) and civil society organizations such as Culture 
Action Europe have emphasized the importance of adopting 
intersectional frameworks in cultural policy design to 
recognize the compounded vulnerabilities faced by women, 
LGBTIQ+ creators and minority groups.
In recent years, some Parties to the 2005 Convention have 
adopted relevant measures in this field. Spain’s Statute 
of the Artist (a set of labour, social protection, fiscal 
and educational measures approved by a series of Royal 
Decrees, following work by a Parliamentary Committee 
and in consultation with several civil society organizations) 
incorporates targeted provisions for migrants, women and 
youth. On the other hand, the Cultural Rights Plan adopted 
by Spain in 2025 acknowledges that there are multiple 
barriers to the exercise of cultural rights and that an 
intersectional and sustained political response is needed. 
225
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
In Latin America, Uruguay’s periodic report highlighted new 
equity-focused initiatives embedded within broader social 
protection reforms, while, with support from the UNESCO-
Aschberg Programme, the National University of Costa 
Rica led a participatory process to formulate a proposal for 
updating the National Policy on Cultural Rights, with a view 
to promote decent working conditions for young artists. 
The proposal was presented to the Ministry of Culture and 
Youth for its consideration. In Asia, the Republic of Korea 
reported targeted programmes for artists with disabilities. 
The Federation of Disability Culture and Arts Associations 
of Korea is a corporation under the Ministry of Culture, 
Sports and Tourism, established by an alliance of 1 1 cultural 
and artistic organizations across the country. Among other 
things, it supports artists with disabilities to develop their 
creative work and to foster their employment opportunities 
and independent living. Together, these examples show 
efforts to introduce equity considerations into national 
cultural and labour frameworks, and highlight how often 
developments in this area require collaboration between 
governments and civil society. 
At the same time, monitoring by civil society provides 
important context, reminding us that reforms remain partial. 
Freemuse’s State of Artistic Freedom 2022 highlights that 
women artists are disproportionately targeted by censorship, 
harassment and moral restrictions, especially in contexts 
where ‘indecency’ or ‘public morality’ laws are applied. 
These limits to their artistic expression impact their 
inclusion in cultural life and capacity to live off of 
their artistic work. In Southeast Asia, Koalisi Seni has 
documented the emotional and professional challenges 
faced by women in the cultural and creative industries, 
with UNESCO Jakarta translating this research into 
English in 2024 to inform regional policy dialogues. More 
recently, the organization examined the conditions of 
gender-diverse artists and creatives (Koalisi Seni, 2025b).
These examples underscore that improving artists’ social 
and economic rights requires not only stabilizing working 
conditions but also correcting entrenched disparities in 
recognition and access to funding and other resources for 
professional development. Achieving equity in the cultural 
sector demands long-term structural transformation and 
intersectional policy frameworks that address the ways 
in which women artists, LGBTIQ+ creators and minority 
artists are affected by multiple vulnerabilities that 
reinforce each other. Without embedding equity as a 
core principle of cultural policy, progress risks remaining 
fragmented and temporary, leaving many communities 
under-represented in national frameworks.
Table 10.1 •  Most frequently reported types of artists’ groups for which specific support measures exist, by region 
Global 
total
Western European 
and North 
American States
Eastern 
European 
States
Latin American 
and Caribbean 
States
Asian and 
Pacific 
States
African 
States
Arab 
States
Young people 19% 22% 22% 19% 15% 15% 25%
Cultural minorities 15% 16% 13% 19% 11 % 13% 25%
Linguistic minorities 12% 14% 13% 10% 11 % 13% 0%
Religious minorities 5% 4% 4% 2% 7% 10% 0%
Sexual minorities 8% 8% 7% 12% 11 % 3% 0%
Artists with disabilities 14% 12% 16% 10% 19% 15% 25%
Artists based in rural areas 9% 8% 7% 7% 11 % 13% 0%
Indigenous Peoples 8% 4% 2% 14% 11 % 10% 0%
People with refugee/
migrant status 10% 10% 16% 7% 4% 8% 25%
Source: UNESCO (1980 Recommendation)
226
For Parties to the Convention
 ¡ Continue to engage with international and regional 
human rights frameworks, networks and mechanisms 
that reinforce recognition and build a shared normative 
understanding of artistic freedom, including initiatives 
across the UN system. 
 ¡ Align national legal frameworks with international 
human rights standards by reviewing, amending or 
repealing restrictive legislation often used to silence 
dissent, such as blasphemy laws and those including 
criminal defamation provisions. Strengthen the 
enforcement of laws safeguarding artistic freedom, 
ensuring they are legally enforceable and effective in 
practice. Establish institutional safeguards, including 
autonomous and well-resourced national human rights 
institutions and ombudsperson offices, while enhancing 
judicial independence and institutional capacity. 
 ¡ Reinforce support measures for artists displaced by 
political unrest and armed conflict. Embed emergency 
protection mechanisms – such as relocation schemes, 
stipends, residencies, and psychosocial and legal support 
– into national and international crisis-preparedness and 
response frameworks. These initiatives should provide 
durable pathways for professional development and 
social integration, while aligning with broader cultural 
policy frameworks and moving beyond temporary relief 
to address the chronic fragility of current systems.
 ¡ Invest in systematic data collection through national 
observatories, independent monitoring bodies and 
partnerships with civil society to close evidence gaps 
and track progress on artistic freedom. Monitoring 
should cover both overt violations and more subtle 
forms of restriction, for instance through administrative 
constraints. 
 ¡ Guarantee accessible legal support and specialized 
defence mechanisms for artists, including those 
prosecuted under laws criminalizing defamation, 
blasphemy, or other provisions used to unjustifiably 
limit artistic freedom; and for those who are targeted 
by SLAPPs and other pervasive threats to artistic 
freedom.
 ¡ Close regulatory gaps by establishing human-rights-
based and culturally grounded frameworks for digital 
governance and resilient protection systems for artistic 
freedom in the digital age. These should address 
threats posed by digital surveillance and algorithmic 
bias, and ensure that authors retain control over their 
moral and material interests, including in the context 
of Generative Artificial Intelligence. 
 ¡ Expand social protection systems for artists by 
formalizing their professional status and integrating 
them into labour, welfare, health and Intellectual 
Property frameworks. This will ensure that progress 
is not precariously linked only to temporary crisis 
measures. Continue to collect quantitative and 
qualitative data related to artists’ working conditions 
and support civil society in advancing important 
research in this area. 
 ¡ Embed equity in funding access and policy design. 
Develop integrated and intersectoral policy frameworks, 
especially in support of artists from vulnerable 
communities, including women, youth, Indigenous 
communities and other minority groups. Commit to 
making the equitable distribution of opportunities 
a core principle of cultural policy through long-term 
structural transformation grounded in intersectional 
approaches.
 ¡ Support civil society’s efforts to safeguard artistic 
freedom by reinforcing its capacity to carry out 
monitoring, research, awareness-raising, advocacy and 
training initiatives, and to provide essential operational 
support to artists at risk. Deepen sustained and 
systematic collaboration with civil society organizations, 
guaranteeing an enabling environment for their 
independent action free from undue political or 
funding constraints.
For civil society 
 ¡ Continue leading independent monitoring efforts and 
advancing research, to make visible violations of artistic 
freedom, raise awareness about the status of artists’ 
rights, advocate for their reinforced protection and 
provide them with emergency and operational support 
to bridge the persistent implementation gap between 
law and practice. 
 ¡ Enhance strategic engagement with key institutions 
and human rights mechanisms at national, regional 
and international levels – including special procedures, 
quasi-judicial bodies and the UN Universal Periodic 
Review process – to advance artistic freedom. 
Strengthen collaboration with other stakeholder 
groups (such as journalists, academics, educators and 
human rights defenders) to foster joint action and 
accountability in support of freedom of expression in 
all its forms.
RECOMMENDATIONS
227
Chapter 10 • Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
For UNESCO
 ¡ Actively cooperate with the international network 
of actors supporting artistic freedom – including 
governments, civil society, regional and international 
human rights bodies, and other intergovernmental 
organizations – to ensure cross-sectoral synergy.
 ¡ Elevate artistic freedom in high-level policy agendas, by 
promoting its inclusion through relevant international 
fora. Build commitment among governments and 
advocate for a coherent global framework that 
safeguards artistic freedom across regions and 
addresses the persistent implementation gap.
 ¡ Enhance coordination with regional organizations and 
other UN agencies to expand cooperation on awareness 
raising, advocacy, monitoring and capacity building in 
the field of artistic freedom. Support the integration of 
emergency protection and support mechanisms for at-
risk and displaced artists into international emergency 
response frameworks, with attention to facilitating – 
beyond urgent forms of assistance – their sustainable 
professional reintegration. 
 ¡ Continue implementing international cooperation 
programmes that support artistic freedom, such as the 
UNESCO-Aschberg Programme for Artists and Cultural 
Professionals, in collaboration with governments and 
civil society. 
 ¡ Strengthen the implementation of international 
normative instruments, such as the 2005 Convention 
and the 1980 Recommendation, which contribute to 
shaping legislation, policies and measures impacting 
on artists’ rights. Ensure complementarity and synergy 
so that the principles embedded in these legal 
instruments are translated into practice across regions 
and countries. 
Annexes
Author biographies
Methodology 
Bibliography
List of figures and tables
Image credits
229
Jordi Baltà Portolés 
Principal Editor 
Jordi Baltà Portolés is a freelance consultant, researcher and trainer in cultural policy, 
sustainability and international cultural relations. His areas of interest include cultural 
diversity, local cultural policy, cultural rights and the relationship between culture 
and sustainability. He is a member of the EU/UNESCO Expert Facility for the 2005 
Convention, an advisor on culture and sustainable cities at the Committee on Culture 
of United Cities and Local Governments and regularly works with other organizations, 
including Trànsit Projectes and On the Move. Jordi Baltà Portolés holds a PhD from the 
universities of Girona and Melbourne, and teaches regularly at several universities.
Andy C. Pratt
Chapter 1 • Building on strong foundations
Andy C. Pratt is Emeritus Professor of Cultural Economy at City St George’s, University 
of London. He also holds the UNESCO Chair on Global Creative Economy. His academic 
research has three strands: the social and economic dynamics of clustering and knowledge 
exchange, the definition and measurement of employment in the cultural and creative 
industries, and cultural governance and policy making at the national, regional and 
urban scales. Andy C. Pratt has worked as an advisor for the European Commission, the 
Council of Europe, UNESCO, UN Trade and Development, the World Intellectual Property 
Organization, the British Council and the Goethe-Institut.
Audrey Yue
Chapter 2 • Reconfiguring media diversity
Audrey Yue is Provost’s Chair Professor in Communications and New Media and Deputy 
Director of the Centre for Trusted Internet and Community at the National University of 
Singapore. Her research spans cultural policy and urban communication, transnational 
Chinese media cultures and queer Asian studies. She has published eight books and 
over one hundred articles and chapters, with recent essays in Big Data and Society and 
the International Journal of Cultural Studies. She has collaborated with art councils in 
Australia, the Republic of Korea and Singapore, creating indicators for multicultural 
participation and digital well-being. She is currently completing a project on digital 
information resilience supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore.
Author biographies 
230
Heritiana Ranaivoson 
Chapter 3 •  The digital environment: online culture, offline implications
Heritiana Ranaivoson is Research Professor at imec-SMIT, Vrije Universiteit Brussel. 
He holds a PhD in Economics from Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne University and was 
associate researcher at Mines ParisTech. He has led several research projects at 
international and national levels for the European Commission, the European Parliament, 
UNESCO and Google. Heritiana Ranaivoson has published extensively in the fields of 
cultural and media diversity, media innovation, media policy, audiovisual platforms 
and the role of recommender systems in cultural industries. His latest co-edited book is 
European Audiovisual Policy in Transition with Routledge.
Ayeta Anne Wangusa 
Chapter 4 • Civil society, voices for culture and action
Ayeta Anne Wangusa is a creative economy and communication specialist who provides 
cultural and pan-African thought leadership for sustainable development through her 
work at Culture and Development East Africa. She has been a member of the EU/
UNESCO Expert Facility for the 2005 Convention since 2015. She is a board member 
of the Collaboration on International ICT Policy for East and Southern Africa and Real 
Transformation Initiative, Tanzania. As a researcher, she has on different occasions been 
commissioned by UNESCO, the African Union Commission, the International Labour 
Organization, Afreximbank and the British Council for creative economy research. She is 
a PhD student in Media and Communication Research at the University of Leicester.
Marie Le Sourd 
Chapter 5 • The shifting borders of cultural mobility
Marie Le Sourd has been Secretary General of On the Move, the international cultural 
mobility information network, since 2012 and Board Member of Culture Action Europe 
since 2025. Prior to this position, she directed the French Cultural Centre in Yogyakarta, 
Indonesia (2006-201 1), and worked at the Culture Department of the Asia-Europe 
Foundation in Singapore (1999-2006), including as Acting Director. Over the years, 
Marie Le Sourd has developed extensive knowledge of international cultural cooperation 
and funding schemes for the mobility of artists, cultural professionals and networks. 
She is deeply interested in the multiple and evolving needs, motivations, contexts and 
realities of mobility for artists and cultural professionals.
Rana Yazaji 
Chapter 5 •  The shifting borders of cultural mobility
Rana Yazaji is Co-Director of Artas Foundation, a Swiss foundation for arts in conflict 
regions. She is also a lecturer and researcher at Zurich University of the Arts, focusing 
on international cooperation and contemporary arts in war and post-war contexts. She 
bases her work on the combination of research and cultural practices focusing on three 
interconnected levels: creative initiatives, institutional building and policy discussions. 
In 201 1 , she co-founded Ettijahat – Independent Culture, a Syrian organization formed to 
support independent arts and culture to play a role in social and political transformation. 
In 2014, she became Executive Director of Culture Resource (Al-Mawred Al-Thaqafy), 
a cultural organization active in the Arab region.
231
Annexes • Author biographies
André Gouws 
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade
André Gouws is a South African economist specializing in trade and cultural policy. 
A former trade diplomat and senior official in national and local government, he has 
contributed to key strategies for the cultural and creative industries, including South 
Africa’s Cultural Economy Master Plan and Cultural Satellite Account. He has led 
socio-economic impact assessments of cultural policies and advised on creative export 
strategies. He holds a PhD in Economics from the University of Pretoria and is currently 
Professor of Practice at the University of Johannesburg while consulting on cultural and 
trade policy.
Jen Snowball
Chapter 6 • Tracking cultural goods and services in global trade
Jen Snowball is Professor of Economics at Rhodes University, South Africa, specializing 
in cultural economics and the creative industries. She is a researcher at the South African 
Cultural Observatory, which provides policy-relevant data and research on South Africa’s 
cultural and creative sectors. She co-leads the Cluster of Research Excellence in Creative 
Economies, a collaboration between the African Research Universities Alliance and the 
Guild of European Research-Intensive Universities, and serves as an editor of the African 
Journal of Creative Economy.
Véronique Guèvremont 
Chapter 7 • Reinforcing the Convention’s influence in international fora 
Véronique Guèvremont is a Professor at the Faculty of Law of Laval University in Quebec 
City, Canada. She holds the UNESCO Chair on the Diversity of Cultural Expressions and 
is co-head of the Arts, Media and Cultural Diversity axis of the International Observatory 
on the Societal Impacts of AI and Digital Technologies. She is also Scientific Co-Director 
of Innovations and Social Implications at the IVADO artificial intelligence research 
consortium. A graduate of Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne University, she has been teaching 
international cultural law and international economic law since 2006. Since 2015, 
she has been a member of the EU/UNESCO Expert Facility for the 2005 Convention.
Leandro Valiati 
Chapter 8 • Mind the gap: culture and sustainable development 
Leandro Valiati has pioneered academic research and transformative evidence-based 
policy frameworks in the field of cultural and creative industries. He is based at the 
University of Manchester and has held academic appointments at Sorbonne University 
and Queen Mary University of London. He was recognized for Exceptional Talent and 
Global Leadership in Creative Industries by the British Academy, and holds advisory and 
fellow positions in the Creative Industries Policy and Evidence Centre, Global Creative 
Economy Council, and the United Kingdom’s Department for Culture, Media and Sport’s 
College of Experts. He is also the author of The Political Economy of the Creative and 
Cultural Industries, which rethinks policy approaches to multidimensional development 
based on cultural and creative industries.
232
Bridget Conor 
Chapter 9 • Gender equality: not an optional extra
Bridget Conor is Associate Professor of Communication at Waipapa Taumata Rau, the 
University of Auckland. Her areas of interest include cultural work, inequalities in cultural 
industries and wellness media. She is the author of Screenwriting: Creative Labour and 
Professional Practice and the co-editor of Gender and Creative Labour. She also wrote the 
2021 UNESCO report Gender and Creativity: Progress on the Precipice.
Andra Matei
Chapter 10 •  Global mandate: safeguarding artistic freedom in law, policy and practice
Andra Matei is an award-winning lawyer working at the intersection of art, law and 
freedom of expression. She is the founder of Avant-Garde Lawyers, which supports 
artists through strategic litigation and legal advocacy. A member of the Paris Bar, she 
has taught at the Paris Bar School, New York University and the University of Applied 
Arts Vienna. She has led landmark cases challenging censorship and legal repression in 
politically sensitive contexts, helping shape international standards on artistic freedom. 
Her work has been recognized for its innovation and impact by both the Quebec Bar and 
the Paris Bar.
233
Annexes • Author biographies
MONITORING THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF THE 2005 CONVENTION 
Since 2012, UNESCO has monitored the Convention on 
the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions (2005 Convention) through its quadrennial periodic 
reporting mechanism. The monitoring of the implementation of 
the 2005 Convention functions as a continuous cycle of data 
collection and analysis, research and knowledge production, 
as well as evidence-based decision making at the national and 
global levels – with the participation of key stakeholders to the 
Convention including Parties, civil society organizations, experts 
and cultural policy makers.
At the heart of the monitoring mechanism lie the Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports, which are structured around the Convention’s 
Monitoring Framework and serve as the primary data source 
for the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report series. These 
periodic reports, submitted to UNESCO by the Parties to the 
Convention every four years, compile policies and measures 
adopted at the national level to implement the Convention 
and advance its goals. 
To assist developing countries Parties to the Convention, 
UNESCO deploys capacity-building activities on participatory 
policy monitoring. 
Methodology
Among these activities, UNESCO encourages the creation 
of multi-stakeholder national working teams responsible for 
gathering information from relevant authorities, drafting periodic 
reports and distributing the Civil Society Organizations Form 
used to collect measures adopted by civil society organizations. 
This work has been supported through funding from the 
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, the 
International Fund for Cultural Diversity and the engagement of 
international experts, principally from the EU/UNESCO Expert 
Facility. In 2024, regional peer-to-peer learning exchanges 
were exceptionally held in all regions to foster the sharing of 
experiences and challenges, promote South-South cooperation, 
and build regional communities of practice that are expected to 
continue in future reporting cycles.
The data collected through periodic reports feed into an array 
of UNESCO knowledge products and tools, including the 
Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report, the Global Report 
on Cultural Policies and the Convention’s Policy Monitoring 
Platform. The knowledge generated by these tools is also taken 
up by cultural policy makers and experts, leading to stronger 
evidence-based cultural policy making and more effective 
implementation of the Convention at the national level. At 
the international level, the governing bodies of the 2005 
Convention play a key role in setting priorities and standards for 
monitoring its effective implementation by all Parties (Figure 1).
234
Monitoring at national level through 
Quadrennial Periodic Reports 
Monitoring and standard 
setting at the global level 
Policy Monitoring 
Platform
Capacity building 
for participatory 
policy monitoring
Evidence-based cultural 
policy making and participatory 
governance 
Data collection, research 
and analysis
Re|Shaping Policies 
for Creativity
Global Report 
on Cultural Policies
Figure 1
The 2005 Convention’s monitoring cycle
PARTIES
2005 CONVENTION  
GOVERNING BODIES
UNESCO KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS AND TOOLS
UNESCO
PARTIES UNESCO
PRIMARY DATA SOURCE 1: 
QUADRENNIAL PERIODIC REPORTS OF 
THE 2005 CONVENTION (2021-2024)
This edition of the Re|Shaping report draws its analysis from 
133 Quadrennial Periodic Reports submitted to UNESCO by 
Parties to the 2005 Convention between 2021 and 2024. The 
reports were submitted by 121 Parties, which represent 77% 
of the total number of Parties to the Convention as of January 
2025 (121 of 158). The distribution of the number of Parties 
having submitted reports per region, compared to the total 
number of Parties in that region, is presented in Figure 2 below.
Figure 2
Submission of Quadrennial Periodic Reports, 
by region (2021-2024)
Source: UNESCO (2005 Convention) 
In cases where a Party submitted more than one periodic report 
between 2021 and 2024, only data from the most recent 
report is included in the analysis of key questions and statistics. 
Furthermore, sample sizes vary across figures as they reflect the 
primary source data only of those Parties that responded to the 
concerned question.
Number of Parties to the 2005 Convention
Number of Parties that submitted a Quadrennial Periodic Report
Western European
and North American
States
Latin American and
Caribbean States
Eastern European
States
Asian and Paci/f_ic
States
Arab States
Regional economic
integration
organizations
African States
1
16
42
18
32
24
25
1
12
30
14
21
20
23
100%
75%
71%
78%
66%
83%
92%
PRIMARY DATA SOURCE 2: SURVEY 
RESPONSES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
THE 1980 RECOMMENDATION 
To supplement the Quadrennial Periodic Reports data, several 
chapters also draw on responses from UNESCO Member 
States and from non-governmental and international non-
governmental organizations to the survey on the 1980 
Recommendation concerning the Status of the Artist (1980 
Recommendation).
A total of 140 responses were received for the fifth 
global consultation on the implementation of the 1980 
Recommendation, carried out in 2022-2023. Of these, 68 
were submitted by UNESCO Member States and 72 by 
non-governmental and international non-governmental 
organizations. The data from the 1980 Recommendation survey 
included in this report represent 35% of UNESCO Member 
States as of January 2023 (68 of 193). Responses from Western 
Europe and North American States were the most represented 
(68%), followed by Eastern European States (48%), Latin 
American and Caribbean States (36%), African States (36%), 
Asian and Pacific States (16%), and Arab States (16%). 
COUNTRY CLASSIFICATIONS
Where relevant, this report uses two classifications to assess 
indicator-level impact: regional classification (UNESCO Electoral 
Groups; Table 1) and classification of countries as developing 
and developed (Table 2). 
Table 1
Regional classification
UNESCO Electoral Group Region
Group I Western Europe and North America
Group II Eastern Europe
Group III Latin America and the Caribbean
Group IV Asia and the Pacific
Group V(a) Africa
Group V(b) Arab States
The classification of countries as developing and developed 
is based on the income levels of UNESCO Member States, 
determined by gross national income per capita as published 
by the World Bank in 2022. Income thresholds follow those 
established by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD).
235
Annexes • Methodology
Table 2
Developing and developed countries classification
Income classification Gross national income 
per capita range
Developing 
countries
Low-income countries Less than US$1 ,135
Lower-middle-income 
countries
US$1 ,136 - US$4,465
Upper-middle-income 
countries
US$4,466 - US$13,845
Developed 
countries
High-income 
countries
Greater than US$13,846
DATA ANALYSIS
Data analysis was conducted in partnership with BOP Consulting.
Analysis according to question type
 ¡ Key questions: The findings in this report are primarily 
based on responses to key questions in Quadrennial 
Periodic Report forms. Analysis involved counting or 
calculating the proportion of responses to specific closed-
answer questions, which were usually binary (yes/no) 
or organized by cultural domain. 1 
 ¡ Numerical and statistical questions: Responses to 
statistical questions, which asked Parties to provide 
specific values or percentages, were also analysed. As 
data quality varied, all responses underwent a quality 
assurance process prior to analysis to ensure consistency 
and identify outliers, and were validated against other 
sources where appropriate. Data from global datasets, 
such as those of the OECD and World Bank, and 
national statistical repositories were used to supplement 
these responses.
 ¡ Open-text response questions and reported policies and 
measures: Within the language processing tool Dataiku, 
which centralizes data from UNESCO instruments, Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) was applied to identify key themes and 
typologies across the open-text responses and policies 
and measures reported by Parties. In addition to the 
above data, chapter authors were provided with 3,908 
policies and measures collected from the Quadrennial 
Periodic Reports submitted between 2021 and 2024. 
Each policy and measure had been individually reviewed 
for pertinence and relevance by the UNESCO Secretariat. 
1 . The Quadrennial Periodic Report form identifies the following cultural domains: 
cinema and audiovisual arts, design, media arts, music, performing arts, publishing and 
visual arts.
These policies are featured throughout the report as in-text 
and case study examples and have been uploaded to the 
Convention’s Policy Monitoring Platform. 
Longitudinal analysis
Where possible, data from previous editions of Re|Shaping 
Policies for Creativity were used to identify trends and changes 
in responses to key questions over time. The reporting cycles 
are as follows:
 ¡ 2021-2024 refers to the data submitted by Parties to the 
2005 Convention in the most recent reporting cycle and 
analysed for this edition of the Re|Shaping Policies for 
Creativity report.
 ¡ 2017-2020 refers to the data submitted by Parties in the 
previous reporting cycle, as published in the 2022 edition 
of Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity.
As part of the longitudinal analysis, keyword searches on 
transversal topics were conducted to assess how frequently 
these issues were mentioned in Quadrennial Periodic Report 
measures submitted between 2012 and 2024. Analysis 
was performed using AI-assisted tools, followed by human 
verification. Longitudinal analyses of policies and measures 
are presented in Chapters 3 and 9, focusing on AI and gender, 
respectively. To account for variations in the number of periodic 
reports and measures submitted each year, keyword frequency 
is expressed as a percentage of the total measures submitted 
that year, calculated using a three-year rolling average. 
INCORPORATION OF SECONDARY 
DATASETS 
In this report, secondary datasets supplement the two primary 
data sources. Use of secondary data varies across chapters, 
depending on the theme and availability of primary source 
data. Some secondary datasets are updated versions of those 
developed in previous editions of the report, while others were 
newly created for this edition. These datasets were developed to 
address gaps in the existing Quadrennial Periodic Report data 
and to reflect emerging policy areas where data is becoming 
more available, such as AI and Aid for Trade. It should be noted, 
however, that identifying robust secondary data on the cultural 
and creative sectors remains a significant challenge in efforts to 
strengthen the report’s evidence base.
The methodological notes below explain how these datasets 
were developed. 
236
Collective management and reproduction rights 
organizations
In Chapter 1 ‘Building on strong foundations’, Table 1 .1 uses 
the dataset ‘Percentage of Parties with Collective Management 
Organizations and Reproduction Rights Organizations’ to assess 
the degree to which regions and countries have established 
effective collective management organization ecosystems. 
The table presents the cultural domains represented by 
organizations that are members of three major international 
rights management bodies: the International Confederation of 
Societies of Authors and Composers (CISAC), the International 
Bureau of Societies Managing Recording and Mechanical 
Reproduction Rights (Bureau International des Sociétés gérant 
les droits d’enregistrement et de reproduction mécanique, 
BIEM) and the International Federation of Reproduction Rights 
Organisations (IFRRO).
Compensation of digital content creators
In Chapter 3 ‘The digital environment: online culture, offline 
implications’ and Chapter 9 ‘Gender equality: not an optional 
extra’, Figures 3.5 and 9.5 use secondary sources that estimate 
the revenue earned by content creators from sharing artistic or 
cultural expressions on digital platforms (such as social media, 
streaming and video platforms) as well as through additional 
marketing or advertising income. 
Detailed user data from these platforms is considered 
commercially sensitive, and they rarely release information 
that can be disaggregated to reveal creator demographics, 
revenues or growth by content type. This lack of transparency 
limits analysis. Consequently, data on digital content creators 
included in this report are drawn from market research 
providers.
Figure 3.5 uses information on data rights remuneration from 
the CISAC. Figure 9.5 presents the results of an Adobe survey 
conducted among content creators in Australia, Brazil, France, 
Germany, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Spain, the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United 
States of America.
Mobility of artists and cultural professionals
Chapter 5 ‘The shifting borders of cultural mobility’ makes 
extensive use of several secondary data sources beyond the 
primary data. Most significantly, these include the Cultural 
Mobility Yearbooks and Cultural Mobility Flows Reports 
published since 2022 by On the Move, an international cultural 
mobility network.
Culture and Recreation Country Programmable Aid 
In Chapter 8 ‘Mind the gap: culture and sustainable 
development’, Figure 8.9 presents countries’ aid levels and 
distributions, based on the total amount and share of Country 
Programmable Aid allocated to culture and recreation. The 
Country Programmable Aid data is the most recent available 
from the OECD, from 2022. 
Country Programmable Aid refers to Official Development 
Assistance that is planned at the country or regional level over 
multiple years. It provides a more accurate reflection of actual 
aid flows than overall Official Development Assistance and 
proves a reliable proxy for aid recorded at the country level. 
THE 2005 CONVENTION MONITORING 
FRAMEWORK
The 2005 Convention Monitoring Framework was developed to 
assess progress and challenges in implementing the Convention 
over time, to guide data collection and to promote a better 
understanding of the Convention’s scope. The Monitoring 
Framework is structured around four goals, divided into eleven 
areas of monitoring that identify policy domains where action is 
needed. Each area of monitoring also has two indicators, along 
with associated means of verification.
The structure of both the Quadrennial Periodic Report form 
and the Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity report is based on 
the 2019 version of the Monitoring Framework. In 2025, 
however, UNESCO began a process to revise this framework at 
the request of the Convention’s governing bodies, particularly 
in response to the increasing impact of digital technologies 
on the cultural and creative sectors and the imbalance in the 
global flow of cultural goods and services. This timely revision 
aligns with UNESCO’s broader efforts to strengthen statistical 
assessment of the cultural and creative ecosystem, including 
through the revised 2025 Framework for Cultural Statistics2 and 
the Global Report on Cultural Policies, both launched at the 
UNESCO World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development – MONDIACULT 2025.
The revised Monitoring Framework will be accompanied by an 
updated Quadrennial Periodic Report form, which is expected to 
be in place for the next submission deadline for Parties’ reports, 
scheduled for 2027.
2. As the 2025 revision of the Framework for Cultural Statistics was not available in time 
to inform the data analysis for this edition of Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity, the report 
instead uses the 2009 UNESCO Framework for Cultural Statistics. 
237
Annexes • Methodology
     Goal 1 • SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE SYSTEMS OF GOVERNANCE FOR CULTURE
Areas of 
monitoring Indicators SDG 
Targets Means of verification
CULTURAL 
AND CREATIVE 
SECTORS
1 .  Policies and measures 
support the development 
of dynamic cultural and 
creative sectors
 
8 .3
8 .3
4 .4
1 .1  Integrated strategies and frameworks
1 .2  Sectoral laws and policies 
1 .3  Job creation and entrepreneurship measures 
1 .4  Education and training programmes
2 .  Policymaking is informed 
and involves multiple 
public bodies
16 .6
16 .7
16 .7
 
2 .1  Ministry with competence and budget for culture
2 .2  Interministerial cooperation
2 .3  Decentralized responsibilities
2 .4  Information systems and statistics
MEDIA 
DIVERSITY
3 .  Policies and measures 
support diversity 
of the media
16 .10
 
 
 
3 .1  Media freedom
3 .2  Media accountability
3 .3  Media monitoring
3 .4  Media ownership
4 .  Policies and measures 
support diversity of content 
in the media
4 .1  Public service media with cultural mandate
4 .2  Content diversity in programming
4 .3  Domestic content incentives
4 .4  Data and information trends
DIGITAL 
ENVIRONMENT
5 .  Policies and measures 
support digital creativity, 
enterprises and markets
 
 
4 .4
5 .1  Diverse actors in the digital industries
5 .2  Digital transformation of industries and institutions
5 .3  Digital creativity and competencies
6 .  Policies and measures 
facilitate access to diverse 
cultural expressions in 
the digital environment
6 .1  Access to domestic digital content
6 .2  Digital literacy
6 .3  Data and information trends
PARTNERING 
WITH 
CIVIL SOCIETY
7 .  Measures strengthen 
the skills and capacities 
of civil society
 
 
 
17 .17
7 .1  Enabling environment for Civil Society Organizations (CSOs)
7 .2  Structuring of CSOs
7 .3  Training and mentoring for CSOs
7 .4  Funding for CSOs 
8 .  Civil society is involved in 
the implementation of the 
Convention at national and 
global levels
17 .17
16 .7
 
 
8 .1  Policy dialogue mechanisms with public authorities
8 .2  Participation in policy design
8 .3  CSO initiatives
8 .4  Participation in the work of the Convention’s governing bodies
DETAILED MONITORING FRAMEWORK OF THE 2005 CONVENTION
238
Goal 2 •  ACHIEVE A BALANCED FLOW OF CULTURAL GOODS AND SERVICES AND 
INCREASE THE MOBILITY OF ARTISTS AND CULTURAL PROFESSIONALS
Areas of 
monitoring Indicators SDG 
Targets Means of verification
MOBILITY OF 
ARTISTS AND 
CULTURAL 
PROFESSIONALS
9 .    Policies and measures 
support the outward 
and inward mobility 
of artists and cultural 
professionals
10 .7
10 .7
 
9 .1  Outward mobility
9 .2  Inward mobility
9 .3  Mobility information systems
10 .  Operational programmes 
support the mobility 
of artists and cultural 
professionals, notably 
from developing 
countries
 
 
 
 
10 .1  Mobility funds
10 .2  Cultural events and exchange facilities 
10 .3  South-South mobility programmes
10 .4  CSO mobility initiatives
FLOW OF 
CULTURAL GOODS 
AND SERVICES
1 1 .  Policies and measures 
support balanced 
international flows 
of cultural goods 
and services
 
10 .a
8 .a
1 1 .1  Export strategies and measures 
1 1 .2  Implementation of preferential treatment
1 1 .3  Aid for Trade
12 .  Information systems 
evaluate international 
flows of cultural goods 
and services
17 .11
17 .11
10 .b
12 .1  Value, origin and destination of cultural goods
12 .2  Value, origin and destination of cultural services
12 .3  Direct foreign investment in culture and creative sectors
TREATIES AND 
AGREEMENTS
13 .  Trade and investment 
agreements refer to the 
Convention or implement 
its objectives
 
 
10 .a
13 .1 Special status for cultural goods and services
13 .2  Cultural clauses related to e-commerce and digital products
13 .3  Preferential treatment provisions 
14 .  Other agreements, 
declarations, 
recommendations and 
resolutions refer to the 
Convention or implement 
its objectives
 
 
14 .1  Agreements aligned with the goals of the Convention
14 .2   Declarations, recommendations and resolutions aligned with 
the goals of the Convention
 
239
Annexes • Methodology
Goal 3 •  INTEGRATE CULTURE IN SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORKS
Areas of 
monitoring Indicators SDG 
Targets Means of verification
NATIONAL 
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
POLICIES 
AND PLANS
15 .  National sustainable 
development policies 
and plans include action 
lines to support diverse 
cultural expressions
8 .3
17 .14
15 .1  Culture and creative sectors in national development plans
15 .2  Public cultural bodies in planning and implementation
15 .3  Evaluation of national development plans and strategies
16 .  Policies and measures 
support equity in the 
distribution of cultural 
resources and inclusive 
access to such resources
 16 .1  Culture-based regeneration plans
16 .2  Participation and access to diverse cultural expressions
INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION 
FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT
17 .  Development cooperation 
strategies include action 
lines to support diverse 
cultural expressions
 
17 .2
17 .1   Culture and creative sectors in development cooperation 
strategies
17 .2  Official development assistance (ODA) for culture 
17 .3  Evaluation of development cooperation strategies
18 .  Development 
cooperation programmes 
strengthen creative 
sectors in developing 
countries
17 .9
17 .9
17 .9
18 .1  Support for cultural policy design and implementation
18 .2   Support for cultural micro and small and medium-sized 
enterprise (SME) development
18 .3  Support for artists and creation
240
Goal 4 • PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS
Areas of 
monitoring Indicators SDG 
Targets Means of verification
GENDER 
EQUALITY
19 .  Policies and measures 
promote gender equality 
in the culture and 
media sectors
 
5 .c
5 .5
19 .1  Government bodies in charge of gender equality
19 .2  Support to women’s participation in cultural life
19 .3  Support to female artists and cultural professionals
20 .  Monitoring systems 
evaluate levels of 
representation, 
participation and access 
of women in the culture 
and media sectors
5 .5 20 .1   Levels of women’s representation in the culture and 
media sectors
20 .2  Levels of women’s participation in cultural life
ARTISTIC 
FREEDOM
21 .  Policies and measures 
promote and protect 
freedoms of creation 
and expression and 
participation in 
cultural life
16 .10
21 .1  Legal recognition of artistic freedom
21 .2  Monitoring of artistic freedom violations 
21 .3  Protection of artists and cultural professionals at risk 
22 .  Policies and measures 
promote and protect 
the social and economic 
rights of artists and 
cultural professionals
22 .1  Transparency of public funding schemes 
22 .2  Social protection
22 .3  Economic rights
241
Annexes • Methodology
PARTIES THAT HAVE SUBMITTED QUADRENNIAL PERIODIC REPORTS 
(2021-2024), BY REGION
Latin America and 
the Caribbean
Argentina (2024)
Belize (2023)
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) (2024)
Brazil (2021 , 2024)
Chile (2024)
Colombia (2024)
Costa Rica (2024)
Cuba (2024)
Dominican Republic (2024)
Ecuador (2024)
Guatemala (2024)
Haiti (2023)
Jamaica (2024)
Mexico (2024)
Panama (2024)
Paraguay (2024)
Peru (2024)
Saint Lucia (2024)
Trinidad and Tobago (2023)
Uruguay (2024)
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) (2024)
Asia and the Pacific
Australia (2021)
Bangladesh (2024)
Cambodia (2024)
China (2022, 2024)
India (2024)
Indonesia (2024)
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (2024)
Mongolia (2024)
New Zealand (2024)
Niue (2023)
Republic of Korea (2022)
Samoa (2024)
Timor-Leste (2024)
Viet Nam (2024)
Africa
Benin (2024)
Botswana (2024)
Burkina Faso (2024)
Cabo Verde (2024)
Cameroon (2024)
Central African Republic (2024)
Côte d’Ivoire (2021 , 2024)
Democratic Republic of the Congo (2024)
Djibouti (2021 , 2024)
Eswatini (2024)
Ethiopia (2024)
Gabon (2024)
Gambia (2023)
Ghana (2021 , 2024)
Guinea (2024)
Kenya (2024)
Lesotho (2024)
Madagascar (2024)
Malawi (2024)
Mali (2024)
Mauritius (2024)
Namibia (2024)
Nigeria (2021 , 2024)
Rwanda (2024)
South Africa (2022, 2024)
South Sudan (2024)
Togo (2021 , 2024)
Uganda (2023)
United Republic of Tanzania (2024)
Zimbabwe (2024)
Arab States
Algeria (2024)
Egypt (2024)
Jordan (2024)
Kuwait (2023)
Mauritania (2024)
Morocco (2024)
Oman (2024)
Qatar (2024)
State of Palestine (2023)
Sudan (2024)
Tunisia (2024)
United Arab Emirates (2024)
Regional economic integration 
organizations
European Union (2021 , 2024)
Western Europe and 
North America
Andorra (2024)
Austria (2024)
Belgium (2021)
Canada (2024)
Cyprus (2024)
Denmark (2024)
Finland (2024)
France (2024)
Germany (2024)
Greece (2024)
Iceland (2024)
Ireland (2024)
Italy (2024)
Luxembourg (2024)
Monaco (2021 , 2024)
Netherlands (Kingdom of the) (2021)
Norway (2024)
Portugal (2024)
Spain (2022)
Sweden (2024)
Switzerland (2024)
Turkey (2021)
United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland (2024)
Eastern Europe
Armenia (2024)
Azerbaijan (2022)
Belarus (2024)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (2022)
Bulgaria (2024)
Croatia (2021)
Czechia (2022)
Estonia (2021 , 2024)
Georgia (2024)
Latvia (2024)
Lithuania (2024)
Montenegro (2024)
Poland (2024)
Republic of Moldova (2024)
Romania (2024)
Serbia (2021 , 2022)
Slovakia (2024)
Slovenia (2024)
Ukraine (2023)
Uzbekistan (2024)
242
Bibliography
Webpages included in sources were last accessed 
on 24 December 2025.
Introduction
UNESCO. 1969. Cultural policy: a preliminary study. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000001 173.
––––. 2014. Report on the ‘Evaluation of UNESCO’s Standard-
setting Work of the Culture Sector Part IV – 2005 
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions’. Paris, UNESCO. 
(CE/14/8.IGC/5b). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000378339.
––––. 2015. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: A Decade Promoting 
the Diversity of Cultural Expressions for Development. 
Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000242866.
––––. 2025. UNESCO Global Report on Cultural Policies, 
Culture: The Missing SDG. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000395504.locale=en.
Chapter 1
Arts and Culture Recovery Taskforce. 2020. Life Worth Living: 
The Report of the Arts and Culture Recovery Taskforce. 
Dublin, Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, 
Sport and Media. https://www.artsandhealth.ie/
research-evaluation/life-worth-living-the-report-of-the-arts-
and-culture-recovery-taskforce/.
Ashton, H., Brownlee, D., Gamble, J. and Stavrou, M. 2024. The 
State of the Arts. Campaign for the Arts and University of 
Warwick. https://www.campaignforthearts.org/reports/
the-state-of-the-arts/.
Bakhshi, H., Siepel, J.  Carmona, L. and Tarr, A. 2025. Unleashing 
Creativity: Fixing the Finance Gap in the Creative Industries. 
Creative UK and Creative Industries Policy and Evidence 
Centre. https://unleash.wearecreative.uk/.
Benghalem, H., Denderski, P . and Wilemme, G. 2023. 
Redesigning Labour Market Policies for the Future of Work: 
Lessons from the ‘Intermittents du Spectacle’ Scheme 
in France. Leicester, University of Leicester School of 
Business. https://hdl.handle.net/2381/24793638.
BOP Consulting. 2017. World Cities Culture Finance Report 
2 017. BOP Consulting. https://worldcitiescultureforum.
com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/World-Cities-
Culture-Finance-Report-2017.pdf.
BOP Consulting and Korean Research Institute on Human 
Settlement (KRIHS). 2019. J. Navarette, I. Larrain de 
Andraca and H. Flores Trejo (eds), Creative and Cultural 
Industries in Urban Revitalization: A Practice Based 
Handbook. Inter-American Development Bank. 
https://doi.org/10.18235/0001994.
Bureau International de l’Edition Mécanique (BIEM). 2025. 
‘Our members’. BIEM. https://prod.biem.org/members/
annuaire.do?method=membersDirectoryList&by=country.
Cultural Relations Platform. ‘ About us’. Cultural Relations 
Platform. https://www.cultureinexternalrelations.eu/
about-us/.
Dagg, J. 2025. ‘How Basic Income for the Arts scheme is 
a win for all’. RTE, 13 October. https://www.rte.ie/
brainstorm/2025/1013/1538224-basic-income-for-the-
arts-scheme-socioeconomic-cost-benefit-analysis/.
Department for Culture, Media and Sport. 2025. 
Creative Industries Sector Plan. UK Government. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/creative-
industries-sector-plan.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ). 2024. Understanding Cultural and Creative 
Industries and Designing Approaches for Its 
Development: A Guide. Bonn, GIZ. https://www.giz.de/
en/downloads/giz20224-en-understanding-cultural-
and-creative-industries-and-designing-approaches-for-its-
development.pdf.
Econometría Consultores. 2022. Impactos del incentivo 
CINA en la industria audiovisual colombiana: 
Ley 1556 de 2012 y Ley 1955 de 2019. Comisión 
Fílmica Colombia and Proimágenes.  
https://comisionfilmicacolombia.com/wp-content/
uploads/2023/03/econometria-2.pdf.
Eurostat. 2025. ‘Culture statistics - cultural employment’. 
Eurostat. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=Culture_statistics_-_cultural_
employment.
Gill, R., Pratt, A.C. and Virani, T. 2019. Creative Hubs in 
Question: Place, Space And Work in the Creative Economy. 
Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-10653-9.
Goldstein, B. 2021 . ‘Decline of the humanities: Where does it 
STEM from?’ The Cornell Diplomat, Vol. 6, pp. 28-30. 
https://hdl.handle.net/1813/1 15107.
243
Annexes • Bibliography
International Confederation of Societies of Authors and 
Composers (CISAC). 2024. ‘Rewarding copyright 
compliance: CISAC “copyright friendly label” in Africa’. 
CISAC, 23 February. https://www.cisac.org/Newsroom/
articles/rewarding-copyright-compliance-cisac-copyright-
friendly-label-africa.
––––. 2025. ‘Members directory’. CISAC. 
https://members.cisac.org/CisacPortal/annuaire.
do?method=membersDirectoryHome.
International Federation of Reproduction Rights Organisations 
(IFRRO). 2025. ‘Membership list’. IFRRO. https://ifrro.
org/page/membership-list/.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025. ‘GFS government 
expenditures by function, COFOG.’ IMF Data. 
https://data.imf.org/en/Data-Explorer?datasetUrn=IMF.
STA:GFS_COFOG(1 1 .0.0).
Jang, S., Kim, J. and von Zedtwitz, M. 2017. ‘The importance 
of spatial agglomeration in product innovation: 
a microgeography perspective’. Journal of Business 
Research, Vol. 78, pp. 143-154. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.05.017.
Lobos, S., López, V. and Gribnicow, A. 2021 . Public Funding 
for Culture and Creativity in Latin America and the 
Caribbean; Budget, Tools and Perspective. Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB). (Paper No. IDB-DP-899). 
https://publications.iadb.org/es/financiamiento-
publico-la-cultura-y-la-creatividad-en-america-latina-y-el-
caribe-presupuestos.
Olsberg SPI. 2024. The Global Incentives Index. Olsberg SPI, 
14 November. https://www.o-spi.com/projects/blog-
global-incentives-index.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2022. The Culture Fix: Creative People, Places 
and Industries. Paris, OECD Publishing. 
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/the-culture-
fix_991bb520-en/full-report.html.
––––. 2024a. ‘New PISA results on creative thinking: 
Can students think outside the box?’. PISA in Focus, 
No. 125. Paris, OECD Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/b3a46696-en.
––––. 2024b. ‘Tertiary graduates by field of study’. OECD. 
https://www.oecd.org/en/data/indicators/tertiary-
graduates-by-field.html.
Pratt, A. 2021 . ‘Creative hubs: A critical evaluation’. 
City, Culture and Society, Vol. 24, 100384. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccs.2021 .100384.
Saudi Film Commission. 2024. ‘Film Saudi’. Saudi Film 
Commission. https://film.moc.gov.sa/en/Film-Saudi.
Tao, J., Ho, C. Y., Luo, S. and Sheng, Y. 2019. ‘ Agglomeration 
economies in creative industries’. Regional Science and 
Urban Economics, Vol. 77 , pp. 141-154. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2019.04.002.
UNESCO. 2024. UNESCO Framework for Culture and Arts 
Education. Abu Dhabi, UNESCO. https://www.unesco.
org/sites/default/files/medias/fichiers/2024/02/
WCCAE_UNESCO%20Framework_EN_0.pdf.
––––. 2025. Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
and Promotion of Cultural Expressions: Recommendations 
of the Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural 
expressions in the digital environment. Paris, UNESCO. 
(DCE/25/18.IGC/7). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000392215_eng. 
UNESCO and United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP). 2013. Creative Economy Report: Widening Local 
Development Pathways. New York, UNDP and Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000224698.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS). 2025. 2025 UNESCO 
Framework for Cultural Statistics. Montreal, UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000395490.
World Economic Forum (WEF). 2019. Agile Governance for the 
Creative Economy 4.0. Geneva, WEF. https://www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_Agile%20Governance_for_
Creative_Economy_4.0_Report.pdf.
Chapter 2
Abernathy, P .M. and Dwyer, D.L. 2022. ‘News deserts’. 
The SAGE Encyclopedia of Journalism, Ed. 4. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781544391 199.n277.
Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA). 
2020. News in Australia: Diversity and Localism — 
International Comparisons. Canberra, ACMA. 
https://www.acma.gov.au/sites/default/
files/2020-12/News%20in%20Australia_Diversity%20
and%20localism_International%20comparisons.pdf.
Barclay, S., Barnett, S., Moore, M. and Townend, J. 2024. ‘Local 
news as political institution and the repercussions of 
“news deserts”: a qualitative study of seven UK local 
areas’. Journalism, Vol. 26, No. 9. 
https://doi.org/10.1 177/14648849241272255.
Barnidge, M. and Xenos, M.A. 2024. ‘Social media news 
deserts: digital inequalities and incidental news exposure 
on social media platforms’. New Media & Society, 
Vol. 26 No. 1 , pp. 368–388. 
https://doi.org/10.1 177/1461444821 1059529.
Bleyer-Simon, K., Brogi, E., Carlini, R., Borges, D. d. C. L., Kermer, 
J. E., Nenadic, I., Palmer, M., Parcu, P . L., Reviglio, U., 
Trevisan, M., Verza, S., Žuffová, M. 2024. Monitoring 
Media Pluralism in the Digital Era: Application of the 
Media Pluralism Monitor in the European Member States 
and in Candidate Countries in 2023. EUI, RSC, Research 
Project Report, Centre for Media Pluralism and Media 
Freedom. https://hdl.handle.net/1814/77028.
244
Bond, S. 2022. ‘What the Joe Rogan podcast 
controversy says about the online misinformation 
ecosystem’. NPR, 21 January. https://www.npr.
org/2022/01/21/1074442185/joe-rogan-doctor-covid-
podcast-spotify-misinformation.
Burke, K. 2025. ‘ ABC doing ‘all the heavy lifting’ as commercial 
networks abandon local kids’ TV drama’. The Guardian, 
27 May. https://www.theguardian.com/media/2025/
may/27/commercial-spending-on-local-childrens-tv-drama-
drops-as-advocates-call-for-abc-sbs-investment.
Colombian Film Commission (CFC). 2023. ‘Law 1556 continues 
to promote audiovisual production in the country’. CFC, 
30 June. https://comisionfilmicacolombia.com/en/law-
1556/.
Council of Europe. 2025. Legal Opinion: On the Draft Law of 
Ukraine “On Amendments to Certain Laws on Media 
Activity” (SFEM-UA). Strasbourg, Council of Europe. 
(LEX_2025_1). https://rm.coe.int/lex-01-ukraine-
legalopinion-medialaw-amendments-to-certain-laws-on-
med/1680b3f154.
Del Monte, M. and Faucheux, T. 2024. ‘Protection of journalists in 
the European Union’. European Parliament. (PE 766.244).
Dickel, V. and Evolvi, G. 2022. ‘“Victims of feminism”: exploring 
networked misogyny and #MeToo in the manosphere’. 
Feminist Media Studies, Vol. 23, Ed. 4, pp. 1392–1408. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2022.2029925.
Enriquez, L. and Melguizo, A. 2021 . ‘Fostering Latin America’s 
digital industries through regulatory sandboxes’. The 
Dialogue: Leadership for the Americas, 9 September. 
https://thedialogue.org/fostering-latin-americas-digital-
industries-through-regulatory-sandboxes/.
European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE). 2025. 
‘ Access to education: Türkiye’. ECRE, 29 July. 
https://asylumineurope.org/reports/country/turkiye/
reception-conditions/employment-and-education/access-
education/.
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 2018. 
‘Directive (EU) 2018/1808 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 14 November 2018 amending 
Directive 2010/13/EU on the coordination of certain 
provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative 
action in Member States concerning the provision of 
audiovisual media services (Audiovisual Media Services 
Directive) in view of changing market realities’. Official 
Journal of the European Union, L 303, pp. 69–92. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/1808/oj/eng.
––––. 2024. ‘Regulation (EU) 2024/1083 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 1 1 April 2024 
establishing a common framework for media services in 
the internal market and amending Directive 2010/13/
EU (European Media Freedom Act)’. Official Journal of the 
European Union, L 1083. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/
reg/2024/1083/oj/eng.
European University Institute (EUI). 2017. ‘Media ownership 
rules in Europe: A focus on EU member states’ legislation 
on foreign ownership’. EUI Centre for Media Pluralism 
and Media Freedom. https://doi.org/10.2870/252187.
––––. 2024. Monitoring Media Pluralism in the Digital Era 
– Application of the Media Pluralism Monitor in the 
European Member States and in Candidate Countries in 
2023. San Domenico di Fiesole, EUI Centre for Media 
Pluralism and Media Freedom. https://data.europa.eu/
doi/10.2870/193899.
Foggin, S. 2020. ‘Colombia’s government is digitalizing social 
inclusion, expanding connectivity’. Latin America Reports, 
6 March. https://latinamericareports.com/colombia-
government-digitalizing-social-inclusion-expanding-
connectivity/4299/.
Fondation Hirondelle. 2024. ‘Studio Sifaka’. Fondation 
Hirondelle. https://www.hirondelle.org/en/our-work/
projects/geographic/africa/madagascar.
Freedom House. ‘Freedom in the World’. Freedom House. 
https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world.
––––. 2025. Freedom in the World 2025: The Uphill Battle 
to Safeguard Rights. Washington, D.C., Freedom 
House. https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/
files/2025-02/FITW_World_2025_Feb.2025.pdf.
Friedland, L.A. 2016. ‘ America’s critical community 
information needs’. M. Lloyd and L.A. Friedland (eds), 
The Communication Crisis in America, and How to Fix It, 
pp. 3–15. New York, Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-349-94925-0_1 .
Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP). 2025. ‘GMMP 2025 
highlights of findings: progress on a plateau; gender 
equality in and through the world news media across 
30 years of media monitoring’. Who Makes the News?, 
4 September. https://whomakesthenews.org/gmmp-
2025-key-findings/.
Hunter, T. 2024. ‘UK local newspaper closures update: 
293 now gone since 2005’. Press Gazette, 14 August. 
https://pressgazette.co.uk/publishers/regional-
newspapers/local-newspaper-closures-uk-2022-to-2024/.
Independent Communications Authority of South Africa 
(ICASA). 2024. Electronic Media Network Limited Annual 
Compliance Report. ICASA. https://www.icasa.org.za/
uploads/files/M-NET-Broadcasting-Compliance-Annual-
Report-2022-2023.pdf.
International Press Institute (IPI). 2022. ‘Four Russian and 
one Belarusian TV channel banned in Estonia’. IPI, 24 
February. https://ipi.media/alerts/four-russian-and-one-
belarusian-tv-channel-banned-in-estonia/.
Kalia, A. 2024. ‘Radio Alhara on the galvanising power of 
broadcasting’. Resident Advisor, 10 December. 
https://ra.co/features/4406.
245
Annexes • Bibliography
Korea Communications Commission (KCC). 2024a. 
‘Broadcasting statistics portal: Mediastat’. Mediastat. 
https://mediastat.or.kr.
––––. 2024b. ‘Broadcasting statistics, easier and more 
accurate!’ KCC, 7 March. https://www.kcc.go.kr/user.
do;jsessionid=RGWnD7TJj0R0on8wyV8cSe3eM8Agp8Rq 
vXMKCbOE.servlet-aihgcldhome20?mode=view&page=E0
4010000&dc=E04010000&boardId=1058&cp=8&search
Key=ALL&searchVal=wi&boardSeq=60017.
Kymlicka, W. 2010. ‘The rise and fall of multiculturalism? 
New debates on inclusion and accommodation in 
diverse societies’. International Social Science Journal, 
Vol. 61 , pp. 97–1 12. https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/j.1468-
2451 .2010.01750.x.
MacBride, S. 1981 . Many Voices, One World: Towards a New, 
More Just, and More Efficient World Information and 
Communication Order. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000372754.
Madrid-Morales, D., Rodríguez-Amat, J.R. and Lindner, P . 2023. 
‘ A computational mapping of online news deserts on 
African news websites’. Media and Communication, 
Vol. 1 1 , No. 3, pp. 330–342. 
https://doi.org/10.17645/mac.v1 1i3.6857.
Marquez, H. 2023. ‘News deserts are rampant in Latin America’. 
Inter Press Service, 14 June. https://www.globalissues.
org/news/2023/06/14/34015.
Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA). 
2020. Strategic Plan 2020/2021-2024/2025. 
Johannesburg: MDDA. https://www.mdda.org.za/
performance/MDDAStrategicPlan_2020-1_2024-
52April2020.pdf.pdf.
Media Reform Coalition. 2023. Who Owns the UK Media? 
2023 Report. London, Media Reform Coalition. 
https://www.mediareform.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2023/10/Who-Owns-the-UK-Media-2023.pdf.
Mendel, T. 2021 . A Practical Guide to Media Law Reform. Paris: 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000380260.
Modgil, S., Singh, R. K., Gupta, S. and Dennehy, D. 2024. 
‘ A confirmation bias view on social media induced 
polarisation during COVID-19’, Information Systems 
Frontiers, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 417-441 . 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-021-10222-9.
Mukhongo, L.L., Mwaura, J. and Omwoha, J. 2024. 
‘Reconceptualising media ownership and shifting power 
relations in an emerging digital media framework’. 
African Studies, Vol. 82, No. 3–4, pp. 300–315. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00020184.2024.2304199.
National Institute of Indigenous Affairs (NIIA). 2023. ‘El INAI 
con el apoyo de la UNESCO lanza un proyecto para 
impulsar el cine indígena en Argentina’. Gobierno de 
Argentina, 6 September. https://www.argentina.gob.
ar/noticias/el-inai-con-el-apoyo-de-la-unesco-lanza-un-
proyecto-para-impulsar-el-cine-indigena-en.
Negreira-Rey, M.-C., Vázquez-Herrero, J. and López-García, X. 2023. 
‘No people, no news: news deserts and areas at risk in 
Spain’, Media and Communication, Vol. 1 1 , No. 3, pp. 293-
303. https://doi.org/10.17645/mac.v1 1i3.6727.
Nenadić, I. 2024. ‘The Media Pluralism Monitor 2024: a 
snapshot of risks to media pluralism ahead of the 
European Media Freedom Act’, EUI: Centre for Media 
Pluralism and Media Freedom, 5 July. https://cmpf.eui.
eu/media-pluralism-monitor-2024-snapshot-of-risks/.
Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Robertson, C. T., Arguedas, A. R. and 
Nielsen, R. K. 2024. Reuters Institute Digital News Report 
2024. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, 
University of Oxford. https://reutersinstitute.politics.
ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2024.
––––.2025. Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2025. Oxford, 
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of 
Oxford. https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/
default/files/2025-06/Digital_News-Report_2025.pdf.
NZ On Air. 2023. Public Interest Journalism Fund Interim 
Report 2021-2023. NZ On Air Te Puna Whakatongarewa. 
https://d3r9t6niqlb7tz.cloudfront.net/media/
documents/NZOA_PJIF_Interim_Report_FINAL.pdf.
Pokharel, U. 2025. ‘Media development challenges in the Asia-
Pacific region’. DK Akademie, 24 July. https://akademie.
dw.com/en/media-development-challenges-in-the-asia-
pacific-region/a-73388422.
Qatar News Agency. 2024. ‘To mark International Women’s Day, 
Qatari Media Center holds panel discussion on women 
and media.’ 9 March. https://qna.org.qa/en/news/
news-details?id=0029-to-mark-international-women%27s-
day,-qatari-media-center-holds-panel-discussion-on-women-
and-media&date=9/03/2024.
Reporters without Borders (RSF). 2025. RSF World Press Freedom 
Index 2025. https://rsf.org/en/rsf-world-press-freedom-
index-2025-economic-fragility-leading-threat-press-freedom.
Saiz-Echezarreta, V., Galletero-Campos, B. and Arias 
Molinares, D. 2024. ‘From news deserts to news deficit: 
analysis of media in depopulated areas’. Journalism, 
Vol. 25, No. 12, pp. 2641-2660. https://doi.
org/10.1 177/14648849231218818.
Schiffrin, A. 2024. AI and the Future of Journalism: An Issue 
Brief for Stakeholders. Paris: UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000391214.
Scoop. 2025. ‘NZ On Air extends funding for two key initiatives 
with $1 .6m boost for journalism’. Scoop Independent 
News, 25 November. https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/
CU251 1/S00176/nz-on-air-extends-funding-for-two-key-
initiatives-with-16m-boost-for-journalism.htm.
Thomson Foundation. ‘Transforming cultural journalism in the 
Western Balkans’. Thomson Foundation. https://www.
thomsonfoundation.org/latest/transforming-cultural-
journalism-in-the-western-balkans/.
246
Törnberg, P . 2018. ‘Echo chambers and viral misinformation: 
Modeling fake news as complex contagion’. PLOS 
One, Vol. 13, No. 9. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0203958.
Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT). 2025. ‘ About 
us’. TRT. https://www.trt.net.tr/english/history.
UNESCO. 2008. Media Development Indicators: A 
Framework for Assessing Media Development. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000163102.
––––. 2015. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: A Decade Promoting 
the Diversity of Cultural Expressions for Development. 
Paris, UNESCO.
––––. 2018. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: Advancing Creativity 
for Development. Paris, UNESCO.
––––. 2022a. Journalism Is a Public Good: World Trends in 
Freedom of Expression and Media Development, Global 
Report 2021/2022. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380618?2=null&queryI
d=0a30ee1 1-7640-48c0-b1c3-8d7e1e5dc867.
––––. 2022b. Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000381 137.
––––. 2022c. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: Addressing Culture as 
a Public Good. Paris, UNESCO.
––––. 2023a. Guidelines for the Governance of Digital 
Platforms. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000387339. 
––––. 2023b. ‘ORIGIN: amplifying the voices of indigenous 
filmmakers’. UNESCO, 27 June. https://www.unesco.
org/creativity/en/articles/origin-amplifying-voices-
indigenous-filmmakers?hub=1 1 .
––––. 2024a. ‘Journalists at the frontlines of crises and 
emergencies’. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000391763.
––––. 2024b. Press and Planet in Danger: Safety of 
Environmental Journalists; Trends, Challenges and 
Recommendations. (World Trends in Freedom of 
Expression and Media Development Series). https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000389501 .
––––. 2024c. ‘World radio day 2024: How Kenya’s community 
radios are strengthening democracy’. UNESCO, 13 
February. https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/
world-radio-day-2024-how-kenyas-community-radios-are-
strengthening-democracy.
––––. 2025a. Oversight Bodies, Access to Data and Digital 
Tools as Essential Elements for Enhancing Access 
to Information: UNESCO’s Report on Public Access 
to Information (SDG Indicator 16.10.2). Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000393238. 
––––. 2025b. ‘UNESCO strengthens local radio capacities 
ahead of Cameroon’s 2025 presidential election’. 
UNESCO, 14 August. https://www.unesco.org/en/
articles/unesco-strengthens-local-radio-capacities-ahead-
cameroons-2025-presidential-election.
––––. 2025c. ‘Call for partnerships: Film residency for young 
women filmmakers in Africa’. UNESCO, 10 March. 
https://www.unesco.org/creativity/en/articles/call-
partnerships-film-residency-young-women-filmmakers-
africa.
––––.2025d. The Guidelines for the Governance of Digital 
Platforms and Generative Artificial Intelligence. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000395825/PDF/395825eng.pdf.multi.
United Nations (UN). 1948. Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. UN General Assembly. https://www.un.org/en/
about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights.
––––. 2015. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. United Nations 
General Assembly. (A/RES/70/1). 
https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda.
––––. 2024. Pact for the Future, Global Digital Compact and 
Declaration on Future Generations. United Nations. 
(A/RES/79/1). https://www.un.org/en/summit-of-the-
future/pact-for-the-future.
––––. 2025a. ‘Connected communities in action: UN Chile drives 
digital transformation in Ñuble and La Araucanía’. Joint 
SDG Fund, 24 April. https://jointsdgfund.org/article/
connected-communities-action-un-chile-drives-digital-
transformation-nuble-and-la-araucania.
––––. 2025b. ‘Gaza City suffering escalates as Israeli strikes 
inflict more heavy casualties’. UN News, 25 September. 
https://news.un.org/en/story/2025/09/1 165948.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2025. 
‘Investigative Journalism Training Workshop’. UNDP Iraq. 
https://www.undp.org/iraq/investigative-journalism-
training-workshop.
Westcott, K., Arbanas, J., Katzenstein, W., Ortiz, D. and Auxier, B. 
2024. ‘ Audiences are becoming increasingly diverse, and 
they expect content that reflects the world around them’. 
Deloitte, 20 March. https://www.deloitte.com/us/
en/insights/industry/technology/digital-media-trends-
consumption-habits-survey/2024/younger-generations-
expect-diversity-in-media.html.
Whitten-Woodring, J. and Van Belle, D.A. 2014. Guide to 
World Media Freedom: A Country-by-Country Analysis. 
Washington, D.C., CQ Press. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781452234229.
Who Makes the News? 2025. ‘GMMP 2025 highlights of 
findings: Progress on a plateau’. Who Makes the News? 
https://whomakesthenews.org/gmmp-2025-key-
findings/.
247
Annexes • Bibliography
World Economic Forum (WEF). 2025. The Global Risks Report 
2025: 20th Edition. Geneva, WEF. https://www.weforum.
org/press/2025/01/global-risks-report-2025-conflict-
environment-and-disinformation-top-threats/.
Zainib, A. 2023. ‘21 most valuable media companies in 
the world’, Yahoo Finance, 8 December. 
https://finance.yahoo.com/news/20-most-valuable-
media-companies-161930500.html.
Zimbabwe Association of Community Radio Stations (ZACRAS) 
and UNESCO. 2024. Community Radio Station Toolkit. 
Harare, ZACRAS. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000391420.
Chapter 3
Adomavicius, G. and Tuzhilin, A. 2005. ‘Toward the next 
generation of recommender systems: a survey of the state-
of-the-art and possible extensions’. IEEE Transactions on 
Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 17 , No. 6, pp. 734-
749. https://doi.org/10.1 109/TKDE.2005.99.
Alcorn, S. 2024. ‘How Spotify started – and killed – Latin 
America’s podcast boom’. Rest of World, 8 August. 
https://restofworld.org/2024/spotify-podcast-crash-
latin-america/.
Bello, P . and Garcia, D. 2021 . ‘Cultural divergence in popular 
music: the increasing diversity of music consumption 
on Spotify across countries’. Humanities and Social 
Sciences Communications, Vol. 8, No. 1 . https://doi.
org/10.1057/s41599-021-00855-1 .
Berg, J., Gmyrek, P ., Licata, M., Gwenyaya, T. and Freytes 
Scaiano, M. S. 2025. ‘Research brief: Generative 
AI and the media and culture industry’. Geneva, 
International Labour Organization. 
https://doi.org/10.54394/FOSL3256.
Bonadio, E., Lucchi, N. and Mazziotti, G. 2022. ‘Will technology-
aided creativity force us to rethink copyright’s 
fundamentals? Highlights from the platform economy 
and artificial intelligence’. IIC - International Review 
of Intellectual Property and Competition Law, 
Vol. 53, pp. 1 174-1200. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40319-022-01213-7.
Bourreau, M., Moreau, F. and Wikström, P . 2022. ‘Does 
digitization lead to the homogenization of cultural 
content?’ Economic Inquiry, Vol. 60, No. 1 , pp. 427-453. 
https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/ecin.13015.
Brynjolfsson, E., Hu, Y. and Smith, M. D. 2003. ‘Consumer 
surplus in the digital economy: Estimating the value 
of increased product variety at online booksellers’. 
Management Science, Vol. 49, No. 1 1 , pp. 1580-1596. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.49.1 1 .1580.20580.
Canedo, D. P . and Paiva Neto, C. B. 2020. Impactos da 
Covid-19 na Economia Criativa: Relatório Final. 
Salvador, Observatório da Economia Criativa – Bahia. 
https://ufrb.edu.br/portal/noticias/5967-observatorio-
divulga-resultados-da-pesquisa-impactos-da-covid-19-na-
economia-criativa.
ConvertKit. 2022. State of the Creator Economy 2022. 
ConvertKit. https://kit.com/reports/creator-
economy-2022.
Creative Australia. 2024. ‘Creative Australia Principles: 
Generative AI and creative work’. Creative Australia. 
https://creative.gov.au/research/creative-australia-
principles-generative-artificial-intelligence-and-creative-
work-0.
Das, B. and Rousseau, J. M. 2025. ‘Exploring the rise of regional 
content on OTT platforms in India’. International Journal 
of Humanities and Social Science Invention, Vol. 14, 
No. 8, pp. 23-44. https://doi.org/10.35629/7722-
14082344.
Deezer. 2025. ‘Deezer/Ipsos survey: 97% of people can’t tell 
the difference between fully AI-generated and human 
made music – clear desire for transparency and fairness 
for artists’. Deezer, 12 November. https://newsroom-
deezer.com/2025/1 1/deezer-ipsos-survey-ai-music/.
De Voldere, I., De Smedt, E., Peters, T., Ranaivoson, H., 
Komorowski, M., Amann, S., Heinsius, J., Kuczerawy, A. 
and Vanherpe, J. 2024. EU Culture and Creative Sectors 
Policy: Overview and Future Perspectives. European 
Parliament, Directorate General for Internal Policies of the 
Union. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/120739.
Digital Culture Network. 2025. ‘ About the network’. Digital 
Culture Network. https://digitalculturenetwork.org.uk/
about/about-the-network/.
Ditto Music. 2025. ‘48% of artists use AI to make music - 
fewer than in 2023’. Ditto Music, 20 May. 
https://press.dittomusic.com/48-of-artists-use-ai-to-make-
music-fewer-than-in-2023.
Down, A. 2025. ‘ AI slop tops Billboard and Spotify charts as 
synthetic music spreads’. The Guardian, 13 November. 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/
nov/13/ai-music-spotify-billboard-charts.
European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO). 2025. 
The Development of Generative Artificial Intelligence 
from a Copyright Perspective. EUIPO. 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2814/3893780.
Fabric. 2025. ‘South Africa trends: local platforms lead the 
market’. Fabric, 19 February. https://www.fabricdata.
com/south-africa-trends-local-platforms-lead-the-market.
Gardiner, D. 2024. ‘Balancing act: the role of digital platforms 
in shaping the conditions of creative work’. ILO 
Working Papers, No. 123. Geneva, International Labor 
Organization. https://doi.org/10.54394/JDUJ2404.
248
German Commission for UNESCO. 2024. ‘ Approaches to an 
ethical development and use of AI in the cultural and 
creative industries’. German Commission for UNESCO. 
https://www.unesco.de/dokumente-und-hintergruende/
publikationen/detail/approaches-to-an-ethical-
development-and-use-of-ai-in-the-cultural-and-creative-
industries/.
GWI. 2022. The Global Media Landscape: GWI’s Flagship 
Report on the Latest Trends in Global Media. GWI. 
https://www.reasonwhy.es/media/library/gwi-the-
global-media-landscape-20222023.pdf.
Hays, S. 2024. ‘ AI training and copyright infringement: 
solutions from Asia’. Tech Policy Press, 30 October. 
https://www.techpolicy.press/ai-training-and-copyright-
infringement-solutions-from-asia/.
Independent Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence and 
Culture (CULTAI). 2025. Report of the Independent 
Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence and Culture. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://mondiacult2025.com/wp-content/
uploads/2025/09/CULTAI_Report-of-the-Independent-
Expert-Group-on-Artificial-Intelligence-and-Culture.pdf.
International Confederation of Societies of Authors and 
Composers (CISAC). 2019. CISAC Global Collections 
Report 2019. CISAC. https://www.cisac.org/Newsroom/
global-collections/global-collections-report-2019.
––––. 2020. CISAC Global Collections Report 2020. CISAC. 
https://www.cisac.org/Newsroom/global-collections/
global-collections-report-2020.
––––. 2021 . CISAC Global Collections Report 2021. CISAC. 
https://www.cisac.org/Newsroom/global-collections/
global-collections-report-2021 .
––––. 2022. CISAC Global Collections Report 2022. CISAC. 
https://www.cisac.org/Newsroom/global-collections/
global-collections-report-2022.
––––. 2023. CISAC Global Collections Report 2023. CISAC. 
https://www.cisac.org/services/reports-and-research/
global-collections-report-2023.
––––. 2024. CISAC Global Collections Report 2024. CISAC. 
https://www.cisac.org/Newsroom/global-collections/
global-collections-report-2024.
International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers 
(CISAC) and PMP Strategy. 2024. Study on the Economic 
Impact of Generative AI in the Music and Audiovisual 
Industries. PMP Strategy. https://www.cisac.org/services/
reports-and-research/cisacpmp-strategy-ai-study.
International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI). 
2025. Global Music Report 2025. IFPI. https://www.ifpi.
org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/GMR2025_SOTI.pdf.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2023. ‘Facts and 
figures 2023’. ITU. https://www.itu.int/itu-d/reports/
statistics/facts-figures-2023/.
Keslassy, E. 2022. ‘Netflix meets 30% European content quota 
in almost all markets on continent’. Variety, 7 June. 
https://variety.com/2022/digital/global/netflix-30-
europe-content-quota-avms-1235286587/.
Kitili, J. 2022. ‘The MOU between Netflix and the Kenyan 
Government and why it is important.’ Strathmore 
University Centre for Intellectual Property and Information 
Technology Law, 7 July. https://cipit.strathmore.edu/
the-mou-between-netflix-and-the-kenyan-government-and-
why-it-is-important.
Kostovska, I., Komorowski, M., Raats, T. and Tintel, S. 2023. 
‘“Netflix taxes” as tools for supporting European 
audiovisual ecosystems: policy interventions 
for rights retention by independent producers’. 
H. Ranaivoson, S. Broughton Micova and T. Raats (eds), 
European Audiovisual Policy in Transition, 1st edn, 
pp. 64-84. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003262732-14.
Kulesz, O. 2024. Artificial Intelligence and International 
Cultural Relations: Challenges and Opportunities 
for Cross-Sector Collaboration. Stuttgart, Institut für 
Auslandsbeziehungen. https://doi.org/10.17901/1203.
Mada. 2024. ‘Launch of tailored training program for Ministry 
of Culture employees’. Mada, 2 November. 
https://mada.org.qa/launch-of-tailored-training-program-
for-ministry-of-culture-employees/.
Maslej, N., Fattorini, L., Perrault, R., Parli, V., Reuel, A., 
Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Ligett, K., Lyons, T., 
Manyika, J., Niebles, J. C., Shoham, Y., Wald, R. and 
Clark, J. 2024. The AI Index 2024 Annual Report. AI 
Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered 
AI, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.19522.
Mcque, K., Martins, L., Bhattacharya, A. and Du Plessis, C. 
2025. ‘The global struggle over how to regulate 
AI’. Rest of World, 21 January. https://restofworld.
org/2025/global-ai-regulation-big-tech/.
Muwado. 2025. ‘Stream East launched’. Muwado, 15 July. 
https://muwado.com/stream-east-launched/.
Ok Jeon, J., Masunah, J. and Karyono, T. 2024. ‘Media art 
community festival based on local culture in Indonesia: 
an ethno-pedagogy perspective’. Journal of Urban Culture 
Research, Vol. 28, pp. 248-267. 
https://doi.org/10.14456/jucr.2024.12.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2022. Culture and the Creative Economy in 
Colombia: Leveraging the Orange Economy. Paris, OECD. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/184f1e07-en.
Page, W. and Dalla Riva, C. 2023. ‘Glocalisation’ of music 
streaming within and across Europe’. Europe in Question, 
No. 182/2023. London School of Economics and 
Political Science. https://www.lse.ac.uk/european-
institute/Assets/Documents/LEQS-Discussion-Papers/
EIQPaper182.pdf.
249
Annexes • Bibliography
PC Tech. 2021 . ‘MTN Kibanda Xpress knocks off60% marketing 
costs for film industry – Mzee Bwankia’. PC Tech, 8 May. 
https://pctechmag.com/2021/05/mtn-kibanda-xpress-
knocks-off-60-marketing-costs-for-film-industry/.
Poltz, J. and Heine, F. 2025. ‘OpenAI used song lyrics in 
violation of copyright laws, German court says’. Reuters, 
1 1 November. https://www.reuters.com/world/
german-court-sides-with-plaintiff-copyright-case-against-
openai-2025-1 1-1 1/.
Ramachandran, N. 2025. ‘Netflix’s Asia Pacific film slate drives 
20% viewership surge in booming market’. Variety, 
21 April. https://variety.com/2025/tv/news/netflix-
asia-pacific-film-viewership-surge-1236374352/.
Ranaivoson, H. 2019. ‘Online platforms and cultural diversity in 
the audiovisual sectors: a combined look at concentration 
and algorithms’. L. Albornoz and T. G. Leiva (eds), 
Audiovisual Industries and Diversity: Economics and 
Policies in the Digital Era, pp. 100-1 18. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429427534-6.
––––. 2020. ‘Cultural diversity’. R. Towse and T. Navarrete 
Hernández (eds), Handbook of Cultural Economics, 
3rd edn, pp. 183-191 . https://doi.org/10.4337/978178
8975803.00026.
Ranaivoson, H. and Rozgonyi, K. 2023. ‘The Audiovisual 
Media Services Directive and the effectiveness of media 
transparency requirements’. H. Ranaivoson, S. Broughton 
Micova and T. Raats (eds), European Audiovisual Policy 
in Transition, 1st edn, pp. 135-153. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003262732-12.
Ranaivoson, H., Smets, A. and Ballon, P . 2024. ’15 Challenges 
and opportunities for recommender systems in media 
markets’. U. Rohn, M. B. von Rimscha and T. Raats (eds), 
De Gruyter Handbook of Media Economics, pp. 215-228. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/97831 10793444-015.
Salganik, R., Wiratama, V., Ranaivoson, H. and Afilipoaie, A. 
2024. ‘Navigating discoverability in the digital era: 
a theoretical framework’. arXiv.org. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.09917.
Shumailov, I., Shumaylov, Z., Zhao, Y., Papernot, N., Anderson, R. 
and Gal, Y. 2024. ‘ AI models collapse when trained on 
recursively generated data’. Nature, No. 631 , pp. 755-759. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07566-y.
Soriano, J. 2023. ‘ A new arts and culture centre is opening 
in Hong Kong by the end of 2023’. Lifestyle Asia, 
17 August. https://www.lifestyleasia.com/hk/whats-
on/news-whats-on/east-kowloon-cultural-centre-new-arts-
complex-opening-in-hong-kong/.
Tabbakh, A., Al Amin, L., Islam, M., Mahmud, G. M. I., 
Chowdhury, I. K. and Mukta, M. S. H. 2024. ‘Towards 
sustainable AI: a comprehensive framework for Green AI’. 
Discover Sustainability, Vol. 5. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s43621-024-00641-4.
Tech Review Africa. 2025. ‘Malawi boosts digital storytelling 
with grants for local content creators’. Tech Review 
Africa, 21 July. https://techreviewafrica.com/public/
news/2523/malawi-boosts-digital-storytelling-with-
grants-for-local-content-creators#0.
Thuillas, O. and Wiart, L. 2023. Les plateformes à la 
conquête des industries culturelles. Grenoble, Presses 
universitaire de Grenoble. https://doi.org/10.3917/pug.
thuil.2023.01 .
UNESCO. 2022. UNESCO’s 1980 Recommendation Concerning 
the Status of the Artist: Promoting the Professional, Social 
and Economic Rights of Artists. Paris, UNESCO. https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000382658.
––––. 2023. ‘Boosting digital transformation of cultural and 
creative industries in the Republic of Moldova’. UNESCO, 
5 July. https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/boosting-
digital-transformation-cultural-and-creative-industries-
republic-moldova.
––––. 2025. Report and Recommendations of the Reflection 
Group on the Diversity of Cultural Expressions in the 
Digital Environment. Paris, UNESCO. (DCE/25/10.
CP/INF.8). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000393574_eng.
United Nations Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2024. 
Creative Economy Outlook 2024: Technical and Statistical 
Report. New York, United Nations. https://unctad.org/
publication/creative-economy-outlook-2024.
Vlassis, A. 2023. ‘Regulating Netflix: a cross-national 
momentum?’ Internet Policy Review, 21 April. 
https://policyreview.info/articles/news/regulating-
netflix-cross-national-momentum/1706.
Vlassis, A., Riga, D., Psychogiopoulou, E., Samaras, A. and 
Kandyla, A. 2024. Origins, Goals and Effects of EU Law 
and Policy in the Online Music Sector. Fair MusE. 
https://fairmuse.eu/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/
Fair-MusE_D2.1_final_disclaimer-min.pdf.
Chapter 4
African Union, 2024. The Sixth Pan-African Cultural Congress 
of the African Union: Participation of the Executive 
Secretariat of ACALAN. https://au.int/sites/default/
files/pressreleases/44183-pr-PAC_En1 .pdf.
Bailey, C., Theodoulou Charalambous, E. and Drion, G. 2024. 
‘Reflection and conclusion’. C. Bailey, E. Theodoulou 
Charalambous and G. Drion (eds.), Cultural Governance: 
Current and Future European Perspectives. Abingdon and 
New York, Routledge and ENCATC, pp. 253-261 . 
Conseil National des Organisations d’Artistes (CNOA). 2025. 
https://web.cnoa.bj.
250
Culture and Development East Africa (CDEA). 2024. Policy 
Brief: Financing Arts and Culture in Tanzania. Dar es 
Salaam, Tanzania, CDEA. https://issuu.com/cdea.
tanzania/docs/policy_brief_financing_arts_and_
culture_in_tanzan.
Delfín, M. 2022. ‘Opening up cultural governance through civil 
society participation’. UNESCO (ed.), Re|Shaping Policies 
for Creativity: Addressing Culture as a Global Public 
Good. Paris, UNESCO, pp. 1 17-137. https://www.unesco.
org/reports/reshaping-creativity/2022/en.
EU SEE. 2025. ‘The Impact of the US Funding Freeze on Civil 
Society’, EU SEE. https://eusee.hivos.org/document/the-
impact-of-the-us-funding-freeze-on-civil-society/.
Firmin, A., Pousadela, I. M. and Tiwana, M. 2025. 2025 State 
of Civil Society Report. CIVICUS. https://publications.
civicus.org/publications/2025-state-of-civil-society-
report/.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2023. Promoting 
Decent Work in the African Cultural and Creative 
Economy. Geneva, ILO, pp. 52-60. https://www.ilo.org/
publications/promoting-decent-work-african-cultural-and-
creative-economy. 
Ministerio de las Culturas, las Artes y el Patrimonio. 2025a. 
‘Educación y Cultura’. Government of Chile. 
https://educacionycultura.cultura.gob.cl.
––––. 2025b. ‘Políticas culturales’. Government of Chile. 
https://www.cultura.gob.cl/politicas-culturales/.
Nivón Bolán, E., Dominzain, S. and Rubim, A. A. C. 2024. 
‘Presentación: Políticas culturales en América Latina en 
el siglo XXI’. A. A. C. Rubim, S. Dominzain and E. Nivón 
Bolán (eds), Políticas culturales en el siglo XXI en ocho 
países de América Latina. Buenos Aires, CLACSO, 
pp. 1 1-23. https://libreria.clacso.org/publicacion.
php?p=3681&c=5.
Observatory of Cultural Policies in Africa (OCPA). 2025. ‘OCPA 
Home Page’. https://ocpa.irmo.hr/index-en.html.
Pousadela, I. M. 2025. Cutting Civil Society’s Lifeline: The 
Global Spread of Foreign Agents Laws. CIVICUS. 
https://publications.civicus.org/publications/foreign-
agents-laws-report/.
South African Cultural Observatory (SACO). 2025. ‘ About us’. 
https://www.southafricanculturalobservatory.org.za/
about-us.
UNESCO. 2025a. Conference of Parties to the Convention on 
the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions: Final report on the third evaluation of the 
International Fund for Cultural Diversity (IFCD) – 201 7-
2024. Paris, UNESCO. (DCE/25/10.CP/INF.7). 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000393570.locale=en.
––––. 2025b. ‘UNESCO supports the Lautem Cultural Alliance 
for more community-driven development in Timor-Leste’. 
https://www.unesco.org/creativity/en/articles/unesco-
supports-lautem-cultural-alliance-more-community-driven-
development-timor-leste.
Chapter 5
Arnell, G. 2024. ‘ A brief conversation #3: is Caribbean aviation 
doomed to high costs and instability?’. LinkedIn, 7 June. 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/brief-conversation-3-
caribbean-aviation-doomed-high-costs-arnell-6bjse/.
Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF) Culture360. 2017. Culture360. 
‘Our work’. https://culture360.asef.org/our-work/.
Baltà Portolés, J. 2024. Perspective Report 2024: On the Move 
Members at Work. Brussels, On the Move. 
https://www.on-the-move.org/resources/library/
perspective-report-2024. 
Baltà Portolés, J., Floch, Y., Fol, M. and Sert, M. 2019. 
Operational Study: Mobility Scheme for Artists and 
Culture Professionals in Creative Europe Countries. 
Brussels, On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/
sites/default/files/library/2023-03/OTM_iportunus-
operational-study_2019.pdf.
––––. 2024. Y. Floch (ed.), Cultural Mobility Flows: the 
International Mobility of Disabled Artists and Culture 
Professionals. Brussels, On the Move. https://on-the-
move.org/resources/library/cultural-mobility-flows-
international-mobility-disabled-artists-and-culture.
Bozar and Goethe-Institut. 2022. I. Benanni et al. (eds), 
Halaqat: Exploring Cultural Links between Europe and 
the Arab World. Brussels, Goethe-Institut. 
https://www.goethe.de/resources/files/pdf300/
halaqat_digital_en_sub_compressed-v2.pdf.
Caribbean Culture Fund. 2025. ‘ About us’. Caribbean Culture 
Fund. https://caribbeanculturefund.org/about-us/.
Concerts SA. 2024. ‘Callout: live music mobility subsidies’. 
IKS Africa. https://iksafrica.com/?na=v&nk=234-
64f6cbb1c0&id=8.
Council of the European Union. 2023a. ‘Council and European 
Parliament agree on rules to digitalise the visa 
procedure’. Council of the European Union, 13 June. 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-
releases/2023/06/13/council-and-european-parliament-
agree-on-rules-to-digitalise-the-visa-procedure/.
––––. 2023b. ‘Council conclusions on at-risk and displaced 
artists’. Official Journal of the European Union, pp. 39-43. 
(Doc. 2023/C 185/09). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52023XG0526(02).
251
Annexes • Bibliography
Creative Scotland. 2023. ‘Four Nations International Fund’. 
Creative Scotland. https://www.creativescotland.com/
funding/funding-programmes/targeted-funding/four-
nations-international-fund.
Culture Funding Watch. 2025. ‘ About us’. Culture Funding 
Watch. https://culturefundingwatch.com/.
Directorate-General for Migration and Home Affairs. 2023. 
‘Everything you need to know on the Schengen visa 
digitalisation’. European Commission, 1 December. 
https://home-affairs.ec.europa.eu/news/everything-you-
need-know-schengen-visa-digitalisation-2023-12-01_en.
Dowden, S., Floch, Y., Ilić, M. and Wilson, C. R. 2024. Y. Floch 
(ed.) Cultural Mobility Flows: Mental Health, Well-
Being and International Cultural Mobility. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/sites/default/
files/2024-10/OTM_CMF-Report_Well-being.pdf.
Ellingsworth, J. 2023. Schengen Visa Code and Cultural 
Mobility: Latest Insights with a Focus on Artists and 
Culture Professionals from the African Continent. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/sites/default/
files/library/2023-10/OTM_shengen-visa-code-cultural-
mobility.pdf.
Ellingsworth, J., Floch, Y. and Verstraete, K. 2023. J. Ellingsworth 
and K. Kheriji-Watts (eds), Cultural Mobility Flows: 
Parenting and International Cultural Mobility. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/sites/default/
files/library/2023-09/OTM_cultural-mobility-flows-
parenting.pdf.
Europe Beyond Access. 2025. ‘What we do’. Europe Beyond Access. 
https://www.europebeyondaccess.com/what-we-do. 
European Commission. 2025. ‘Culture moves Europe: 
supporting cultural mobility in Europe and beyond’. 
European Commission. https://culture.ec.europa.eu/
creative-europe/creative-europe-culture-strand/culture-
moves-europe.
European Parliament. Resolution with Recommendations to 
the Commission on an EU Framework for the Social 
and Professional Situation of Artists and Workers in the 
Cultural and Creative Sectors. (2023/2051(INL). Brussels, 
European Parliament. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
doceo/document/TA-9-2023-0405_EN.pdf.
Franco, J.M. 2024. ‘Why aren’t Caribbean artists better 
funded?’. Global Voices, 14 September. 
https://globalvoices.org/2024/09/14/why-arent-
caribbean-artists-better-funded/.
German Commission for UNESCO. 2024. Fair Culture Charter. 
Bonn, German Commission for UNESCO. 
https://www.fair-culture.org/.
Indian Ocean Commission. 2024. ‘ AléVini: fence’. Kiltir. 
https://kiltir.org/actualites/alevini.
Institut Français. 2025. ‘Fonds de mobilité indianocéanique’. 
Institut Français. https://balltheater.institutfrancais.
com/fr/offre/fonds-de-mobilite-indianoceanique.
International Network for Contemporary Performing Arts (IETM). 
‘IETM Global Connect: 2021 – 2028’. IETM. 
https://www.ietm.org/en/projects/ietm-global-connect.
Kheriji-Watts, K. 2024. International Mobility of Artists and 
Culture Professionals: The Lexicon. Paris, On the Move. 
https://on-the-move.org/resources/library/international-
mobility-artists-and-culture-professionals-lexicon.
Lukacs, A. 2022. Zone Franche: Guide Pratique des Visas, 2nd 
edn. Paris, Zone Franche. https://www.zonefranche.com/
adherents/guide-pratique-des-visas-2/.
Mlandu, U.N. 2023. An Invitation to Transform Your Vision of 
the Cultural Mobility Ethic from an African Perspective. 
Brussels, On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/
resources/library/invitation-transform-your-vision-cultural-
mobility-ethic-african-perspective.
Mophradat. 2024. ‘Orbitals: 2018-24’. Mophradat. 
https://mophradat.org/en/program/orbitals/. 
On the Move. 2022. Cultural Mobility Yearbook 2022. 
Brussels, On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/
resources/library/cultural-mobility-yearbook-2022.
––––. 2023a. Cultural Mobility Yearbook 2023. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/resources/
library/cultural-mobility-yearbook-2023.
––––. 2023b. Cultural Mobility Forum 2023: Sustainable Local 
Strategies and Cultural Impacts. YouTube, 6 June. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A-kLU-q-
xAQ&t=4896s.
––––. 2023c. ‘Mobility Webinar: Mental health, Well-
Being and International Cultural Mobility’. YouTube, 
22 November. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6_
mNA4zdqE&t=15s.
––––. 2023d. ‘Mobility information points’. On the Move. 
https://on-the-move.org/mobility-information-points.
––––. 2024. Cultural Mobility Yearbook 2024. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/sites/default/
files/2024-03/OTM_yearbook_2024.pdf.
––––. 2025a. Cultural Mobility Yearbook 2025. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/resources/
library/cultural-mobility-yearbook-2025.
––––. 2025b. Mobility Webinar: Internationalization and the 
Caribbean. YouTube. https://on-the-move.org/resources/
library/mobility-webinar-internationalisation-and-
caribbean.
––––. 2025c. ‘Funding guides’. On the Move. 
https://on-the-move.org/resources/funding. 
252
––––. 2025d. Cultural Mobility Flows: Mobility Information 
Points at Work 2024. Brussels, On the Move. 
https://on-the-move.org/resources/library/cultural-
mobility-flows-mobility-information-points-work-2024.
Pan-African Council (PAC). 2023. ‘PAC supports diplomatic 
cultural mission to Brazzaville, Congo’. Pan-African 
Council, 22 May. https://panafricancouncil.org/pac-
supports-diplomatic-cultural-mission-to-brazzaville-congo/.
Pearle* Live Performance Europe. 2020. A. Debaere (ed.), 
The Ultimate Cookbook for Cultural Managers: Visas for 
Third Country National Artists Travelling to the Schengen 
Area. Brussels, European Festivals Association. 
https://www.pearle.eu/publication/the-ultimate-
cookbook-for-cultural-managers-visas-for-third-country-
national-artists-travelling-to-the-schengen-area-
update-2020.
––––. 2024. A. Debaere (ed.), The Ultimate Cookbook for 
Cultural Managers: Third Country Nationals Working in 
the EU. Brussels, European Festivals Association. 
https://www.pearle.eu/publication/the-ultimate-
cookbook-for-cultural-managers-third-country-national-
artists-working-in-the-eu-1 .
Polivtseva, E. and Stambke, F. 2025. Y. Floch and C.R. 
Wilson (eds), Policy and Practice in the EU: Pathways, 
Impediments and Patchwork Solutions, Vol. 2. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/resources/
library/policy-and-practice-eu-pathways-impediments-and-
patchwork-solutions-volume-2.
Roberto Cimetta Fund. 2025. F. Bouquerel and M. Helmy 
(eds), Move in Med: Mobility Stories. Ready, Steady, Go!. 
https://www.cimettafund.org/blog/2025/03/10/
move-in-med-mobility-stories/.
Sekhar, A. 2024. Lessons from Connecting South: The Journey 
of the South-South Arts Fellowships 2022-23. Living 
Arts International. https://on-the-move.org/resources/
library/lessons-connecting-south-journey-south-south-arts-
fellowships-2022-23.
TransArtists. 2025. ‘Residency database’. TransArtists. 
https://www.transartists.org/en.
Transversal Project. 2025. ‘Rawabet: performing artists-in-
residence Malmö/Sweden’. Transversal Project. 
https://www.transversal.eu/rawabet.
UNESCO. 2023. Empowering Creativity: Implementing the 
UNESCO 1980 Recommendation Concerning the Status 
of the Artists, 5th edn. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000387452.locale=en.
––––. 2024. Greening Curriculum Guidance: Teaching and 
Learning for Climate Action. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000390022.
––––. 2025a. Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
and Promotion of Cultural Expressions: Recommendations 
of the Intergovernmental Reflection Group on the 
implementation of Article 16 on “Preferential treatment 
for developing countries”. Paris, UNESCO. (DCE/25/18.
IGC/8). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000392217_eng.
––––. 2025b. 18th Session of the Intergovernmental Committee 
2005 Convention. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=myhNV0Ldgkg&t=27241s.
United Nations. 2025. Methodology: standard country or area 
codes for statistical use (M49). United Nations Statistics 
Division. https://unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49/.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2018. Fact Sheet on 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): Health Targets 
(Mental Health). Copenhagen, WHO Regional Office for 
Europe. https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/
item/WHO-EURO-2018-2364-421 19-58012. 
Yazaji, R. 2025. Intersecting Temporalities: At-Risk and 
Displaced Artists in Transition. The Situation of At-Risk 
and Displaced Artists and Culture Professionals. Brussels, 
On the Move. https://on-the-move.org/resources/
library/intersecting-temporalities-risk-and-displaced-artists-
transition-volume-1-scoping.
Zone Franche. 2023. ‘Communiqué de presse de 61 
organisations du monde de la musique, de la culture 
et du spectacle vivant’. Zone Franche. https://www.
zonefranche.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/2023-
CP-de-61-organisations-du-monde-de-la-musique-de-la-
culture-et-du-spectacle-vivant-sur-la-situation-des-artistes-et-
acteurs-culturels-malien-nigeriens-et-burkinabes.pdf.
––––. 2025a. ‘Pas de visa : quand la France ferme ses portes 
aux artistes qu’elle s’engage à accueillir’. Zone Franche, 
18 March. https://www.zonefranche.com/actualites/cp-
de-zone-franche-pas-de-visa/.
––––. 2025b. ‘ Artists Visas Committee. Zone Franche. 
https://www.zonefranche.com/en/comite-visas-artistes/.
Chapter 6
Artnet. 2025. The Intelligence Report: The Year Ahead, 2025. 
Berlin, Artnet AG. https://media.artnet.com/image/
upload/IR%20Spring%202025/Artnet_IR_2025_
MAR17.pdf.
Brazilian Game Developers Association. 2025. ‘Qualify your 
company for export’. Brazil Games. https://brazilgames.
org/en/qualify-your-company-for-export/.
Buitrago Restrepo, P . F. and Duque Márquez, I. 2013. The 
Orange Economy: An Infinite Opportunity. Inter-American 
Development Bank and Puntoparte Bookvertising. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.18235/0012837.
253
Annexes • Bibliography
Campi, M. and Dueñas, M. 2019 ‘Intellectual property 
rights, trade agreements, and international trade’. 
Research Policy, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 531-545. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.09.01 1 .
Desrochers, M. J. 2024. ‘Cultural diversity in the digital age: 
a pillar for sustainable development’. UN Chronicle, 
20 May. https://www.un.org/en/un-chronicle/cultural-
diversity-digital-age-pillar-sustainable-development.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). 
2024. Jordan National Report 2023/2024. Amman, 
GIZ. https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2024_en_
Jordan_National_Report_GEM.pdf.
Drianda, R. P ., Kesuma, M. and Lestari, N. A. R. 2023. ‘Hallyu 
and FDI: the growth of South Korea’s investment in 
Indonesia’s cultural content industry’. International 
Development Planning Review, Vol. 46, No. 1 , pp. 89-106. 
https://doi.org/10.3828/idpr.2023.18.
Faidi, Z. 2024. ‘Cultural flows: the development and global 
influence of Nigeria’s creative industries’. Rabat, Policy 
Center for the New South. (Policy Paper No. 09/24). 
https://www.policycenter.ma/publications/cultural-
flows-development-and-global-influence-nigerias-creative-
industries.
Fazio, G., Jones, J., Maioli, S. and Simandjuntak, D. 2024. 
UK Trade in a Global Creative Economy. Zenodo. 
(State of the Nations Research Series). 
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.10809397.
Goldman Sachs. 2024. ‘ AI is poised to drive 160% increase in 
data center power demand’. Goldman Sachs, 14 May. 
https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/articles/AI-
poised-to-drive-160-increase-in-power-demand.
González, J. L., Sorescu, S. and Kaynak, P . 2023. ‘Of bytes 
and trade: quantifying the impact of digitalisation on 
trade’. OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 273. Paris, OECD 
Publishing. https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/
of-bytes-and-trade-quantifying-the-impact-of-digitalisation-
on-trade_1 1889f2a-en.html.
Google Trends. ‘YouTube searches for Nollywood movies 
worldwide (2019-2024)’. Google Trends. https://trends.
google.com/trends/explore?date=2019-10-20%20
2024-10-20&gprop=youtube&q=nollywood%20movies.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2025. ‘ Artificial intelligence: 
a transformative technology with important implications 
for energy’. IEA. https://www.iea.org/topics/artificial-
intelligence.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2009. Balance of Payments 
and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), 
6th edn. Washington, D.C., IMF. https://www.imf.org/
external/pubs/ft/bop/2007/bopman6.htm.
International Monetary Fund (IMF), Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD), World Trade 
Organization (WTO) and United Nations (UN). 2023. 
Handbook on Measuring Digital Trade, 2nd edn. Geneva, 
WTO. https://doi.org/10.5089/9789287073600.071 .
International Trade Administration. 2025. ‘Nigeria country 
commercial guide’. International Trade Administration, 
8 September. https://www.trade.gov/country-
commercial-guides/nigeria-media-and-entertainment?utm. 
International Trade Centre (ITC). 2025a. ‘Investment Map’. ITC. 
https://www.investmentmap.org/.
––––. 2025b. ‘Trade Map’. ITC. https://www.trademap.org/
Country_SelService_TS.aspx?.
Jordan Strategy Forum. 2022. Creative Industries: Jordan’s 
Economic Vision Roadmap. Amman, Jordan Strategy 
Forum. https://jsf.org/uploads/2022/12/creative-
industries.pdf.
Korea JoongAng Daily. 2024. ‘K-content exports hit record 
high in 2022’. Korea JoongAng Daily, 14 May. 
https://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/2024-01-
05/business/industry/Kcontent-exports-hit-record-high-
in-2022/1951872.
Loots, E., Betzler, D., Bille, T., Borowiecki, K. J. and Lee., B. 2022. 
‘New forms of finance and funding in the cultural and 
creative industries. Introduction to the special issue’. 
Journal of Cultural Economics, Vol. 46, pp. 205-230. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10824-022-09450-x.
Magdeleine, J. and Maurer, A. 2016. ‘Understanding trade in 
digitized ideas – what are the statistical challenges?’ 
WTO Working Papers, No. 2016/1 1 . 
https://doi.org/10.30875/6a1b6a37-en.
Mazziotti, G. and Ranaivoson, H. 2024. ‘Can online music 
platforms be fair? An interdisciplinary research manifesto’. 
IIC - International Review of Intellectual Property and 
Competition Law, Vol. 55, pp. 249-279. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40319-023-01420-w.
Meinecke, C., Hall, C. and Jänicke, S. 2022. ‘Towards enhancing 
virtual museums by contextualizing art through 
interactive visualizations’. Journal on Computing and 
Cultural Heritage, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 1-26. 
https://doi.org/10.1 145/3527619.
Mudambi, R. 2008. ‘Location, control and innovation in 
knowledge-intensive industries’. Journal of Economic 
Geography, Vol. 8, Ed. 5, pp. 699-725. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jeg/lbn024.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2023. ‘Decoding global services trade: The 
power of the OECD-WTO BaTIS dataset’. OECD Statistics, 
3 May. https://oecdstatistics.blog/2023/05/03/
decoding-global-services-trade-the-power-of-the-oecd-wto-
batis-dataset/.
254
––––. 2025. The OECD Balanced International Merchandise 
Trade Dataset (BIMTS). Paris, OECD Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/07518168-en.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) and World Trade Organization (WTO). 2021 . 
The OECD–WTO Balanced Trade in Services Database 
(BaTIS). Paris, OECD Publishing and Geneva, WTO. 
https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/data/
methods/OECD-WTO-Balanced-Trade-in-Services-database-
methodology-BPM6.pdf.
––––. 2024. Aid for Trade at a Glance: 2024. Paris, OECD 
Publishing and Geneva, WTO. https://www.oecd.
org/en/publications/aid-for-trade-at-a-glance-
2024_7a4e356a-en.html.
––––. 2025. The OECD-WTO Balanced Trade in Services 
Database (BaTIS). Paris, OECD Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/c321a7a7-en.
Peukert, C. and Windisch, M. 2025. ‘The economics of 
copyright in the digital age’. Journal of Economic Surveys, 
Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 877-903. 
https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/joes.12632.
Romanian Game Developers Association (RGDA). 2023. 
‘Romania’s video games industry report 2023’. RGDA. 
https://rgda.ro/romanias-video-games-industry-
report-2023/.
Shaw, A. 2023. ‘Global demand for African art brings 
near-record year for South African auction house 
despite “much higher degrees of uncertainty”’. 
The Art Newspaper. https://www.theartnewspaper.
com/2023/01/27/global-demand-for-african-art-brings-
near-record-year-for-south-african-auction-house-despite-
much-higher-degrees-of-uncertainty.
Shih, S. 1996. Me-Too Is Not My Style: Challenge Difficulties, 
Break through Bottlenecks, Create Values. Taipei, Acer 
Foundation. https://laofutze.wordpress.com/wp-
content/uploads/2010/07/me-too-is-not-my-style.pdf.
Stender, F. and Vogel, T. 2025. ‘What role for aid for trade 
in (deep) PTA relations? Empirical evidence from 
gravity model estimations’. International Economics, 
Vol. 181 , 100574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
inteco.2024.100574.
UNESCO. 2018. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: Advancing 
Creativity for Development. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000260592.
––––. 2019. Culture | 2030 Indicators. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371562.
––––. 2022. Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity: Addressing 
Culture as a Global Public Good. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380474.
––––. 2023. The African Fashion Sector: Trends, Challenges 
& Opportunities for Growth. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000387230.
––––. 2025. Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
and Promotion of Cultural Expressions: Recommendations 
of the Intergovernmental Reflection Group on the 
implementation of Article 16 on ‘Preferential treatment 
for developing countries’. Paris, UNESCO. (DCE/25/18.
IGC/8). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000392217_eng.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS). 2009. The 2009 UNESCO 
Framework for Cultural Statistics (FCS). Montreal, 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000191061 .
––––. 2025. 2025 UNESCO Framework for Cultural Statistics. 
Montreal, UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000395490.
United Nations (UN). 2015. Transforming Our World: The 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. New York, 
UN. (A/RES/70/1). https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda.
––––. 2020. ‘Progress towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals: Report of the Secretary-General’. 
New York, UN. https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/3865828?ln=en&v=pdf.
United Nations (UN), European Commission, Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. 
2025. System of National Accounts 2025. New York, 
UN. https://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/
sna2025.asp.
United Nations Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2022. 
Creative Industry 4.0: Towards A New Globalized 
Creative Economy. Geneva, United Nations. 
https://doi.org/10.18356/9789210012522.
––––. 2024a. K-Content Goes Global: How Government Support 
and Copyright Policy Fuelled the Republic of Korea’s 
Creative Economy. Geneva, United Nations. 
https://doi.org/10.18356/9789213585481 .
––––. 2024b. Creative Economy Outlook 2024. New York, 
United Nations. https://unctad.org/system/files/
official-document/ditctsce2024d2_en.pdf.
––––. 2025a. ‘Creative goods matrix, growth rates, annual 
(analytical)’. UN Trade & Development: UNCTAD. 
https://unctadstat.unctad.org/datacentre/dataviewer/
US.CreativeGoodsGR.
––––. 2025b. ‘Creative services exports of selected groups 
of economies (analytical)’. UN Trade & Development: 
UNCTAD. https://unctadstat.unctad.org/datacentre/
dataviewer/US.CreativeServ_Group_E. 
255
Annexes • Bibliography
––––. 2025c. ‘International trade in creative services: Estimates 
for individual economies (analytical)’. UN Trade & 
Development: UNCTAD. https://unctadstat.unctad.org/
datacentre/dataviewer/US.CreativeServ_Indiv_Tot.
––––. 2025d. ‘Creative services exports of selected groups of 
economies (experimental)’. UN Trade & Development: 
UNCTAD. https://unctadstat.unctad.org/datacentre/
reportInfo/US.CreativeServ_Group_E.
United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) and World Bank. 
2025. ‘World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) – UN 
Comtrade Trade Data’. World Integrated Trade Solution 
(WITS). https://wits.worldbank.org/.
Yanıkkaya, H., Altun, A. and Tat, P . 2022. ‘Once again 
“smile curve”: is chain upgrading possible?’. 
Review of Development Economics, Vol. 27 , pp. 62-88. 
https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/rode.12927.
Chapter 7
Bensamoun, A. 2024. Report Task Force on the Implementation 
of the European Regulation Establishing Harmonized 
Rules on Artificial Intelligence (‘Template’). Paris, 
Ministère de la Culture. https://www.culture.gouv.fr/
Media/medias-creation-rapide/cspla_report_ia-template_
english_dec._2024.pdf.
Council of the European Union. 2022. ‘Council conclusions on 
reinforcing intercultural exchanges through the mobility 
of artists and cultural and creative professionals, and 
through multilingualism in the digital era’. Official 
Journal of the European Union, C 160/20. (2022/C 
160/07). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52022XG0413%2802%29.
Creative Australia. ‘What we do’. Creative Australia. 
https://creative.gov.au/about-us/what-we-do.
Élysée, 2025a. ‘Aims of the summit’. AI Action Summit, 
17 January. https://www.elysee.fr/en/sommet-pour-l-
action-sur-l-ia/aims-of-the-summit.
––––. 2025b. ‘Statement on Inclusive and Sustainable 
Artificial Intelligence for People and the Planet’. Élysée, 
1 1 February. https://www.elysee.fr/en/emmanuel-
macron/2025/02/1 1/statement-on-inclusive-and-
sustainable-artificial-intelligence-for-people-and-the-planet.
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 
2024. ‘Regulation (Eu) 2024/1689 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying 
down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and 
amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 
167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 
2018/1 139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 
2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 
(Artificial Intelligence Act)’. Official Journal of the 
European Union, L. (2024/1689). https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L_202401689.
European Union (EU) and Organisation of African, Caribbean 
and Pacific States (OACPS). 2023. ‘Partnership 
Agreement between the European Union and its 
Member States, of the one part, and the Members of the 
Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, of 
the other part’. Official Journal of the European Union, L. 
(2023/2862). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L_202302862.
G20. 2023. Kashi Culture Pathway: Outcome Document and 
Chair’s Summary. Varanasi, G20 Culture Ministers’ 
Meeting. https://www.g20.in/content/dam/gtwenty/
gtwenty_new/document/2--new/G20_Culture_Ministers_
Meeting_Outcome_Document_and_Chairs_summary.pdf.
German Commission for UNESCO. 2024. Fair Culture Charter. 
Bonn, German Commission for UNESCO. 
https://www.fair-culture.org/.
Human Rights Council (HRC). 2023. ‘Resolution adopted by the 
Human Rights Council on 3 April 2023: Promotion of the 
enjoyment of the cultural rights of everyone and respect 
for cultural diversity’. 17 April. (A/HRC/RES/52/18). 
https://docs.un.org/en/A/HRC/RES/52/18.
UNESCO Chair on the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, 
Université Laval. ‘Les clauses culturelles dans les accords 
commerciaux régionaux et bilatéraux’. Université Laval. 
https://www.unescodec.chaire.ulaval.ca/accords-
commerciaux.
UNESCO. 2018. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: Advancing 
creativity for development. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000260592.
––––. 2022. Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity: Addressing 
Culture as a Global Public Good. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000380474.
––––. 2024. ‘Recommendations of the Reflection Group 
on the diversity of cultural expressions in the digital 
environment’. (DCE/25/18.IGC/7). https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000392215_eng.
United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). 2021 . ‘Resolution 
adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2021: 
Culture and sustainable development’. 21 December. (A/
RES/76/214). https://docs.un.org/en/A/RES/76/214.
––––. 2022. ‘Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 
June 2022: Multilingualism’. 21 June. (A/RES/76/268). 
https://docs.un.org/en/a/res/76/268.
––––. 2023. ‘Resolution adopted by the General Assembly 
on 19 December 2023: Culture and sustainable 
development’. 21 December. (A/RES/78/161). 
https://docs.un.org/en/A/RES/78/161 .
256
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2024. Joint Statement 
Initiative on Electronic Commerce. 26 July. 
(INF/ECOM/87). https://www.wto.org/english/
tratop_e/ecom_e/joint_statement_e.htm.
Chapter 8
African Development Bank Group (AFDB). 2021 . ‘ African 
Development Bank Board approves $170 million for 
investment in Nigeria’s digital and creative start-ups’. 
AFDB, 16 December. https://afdb.africa-newsroom.
com/press/african-development-bank-board-approves-
170-million-for-investment-in-nigerias-digital-and-creative-
startups?lang=en.
Appadurai, A. 2004. ‘The capacity to aspire: culture and 
the terms of recognition’. V. Rao and M. Walton (eds), 
Culture and Public Action, pp. 59-84. Stanford, Stanford 
University Press. https://www.sup.org/books/economics-
and-finance/culture-and-public-action.
BOP Consulting. 2025. BOP500 Database. BOP Consulting. 
https://bop500.bop.co.uk/.
BOP Consulting and Korean Research Institute on Human 
Settlement (KRIHS). 2019. J. Navarette, I. Larrain 
de Andraca and H. Flores Trejo (eds), Creative and 
Cultural Industries in Urban Revitalization: A Practice 
Based Handbook. Inter-American Development Bank. 
https://doi.org/10.18235/0001994.
Brundtland, G. 1987. Report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development: Our Common Future. 
United Nations General Assembly. (A/42/427). 
https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/13981 1/?v=pdf.
Carbon Trust. 2021 . Carbon Impact of Video Streaming. London, 
Carbon Trust. https://www.carbontrust.com/sites/
default/files/documents/resource/public/Carbon-
impact-of-video-streaming.pdf.
Duxbury, N., Kangas, A. and De Beukelaer, C. 2017. ‘Cultural 
policies for sustainable development: four strategic 
paths’. International Journal of Cultural Policy, Vol. 23, 
2nd edn, pp. 214-230. https://doi.org/10.1080/10286
632.2017.1280789.
European Cooperation in Science and Technology (COST) 
and University of Jyväskylä. 2015. J. Dessein, K. Soini, 
G. Fairclough and L. Horlings (eds), Culture in, for and 
as Sustainable Development. Conclusions from the COST 
Action IS1007 Investigating Cultural Sustainability. 
Jyväskylä, University of Jyväskylä. 
https://www.culturalsustainability.eu/conclusions.pdf.
European Union. ‘Recovery and resilience facility: 
NextGenerationEU’. European Union. https://next-
generation-eu.europa.eu/recovery-and-resilience-facility_en.
Eurostat. 2024. ‘Culture statistics – cultural participation’. 
Eurostat. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=Culture_statistics_-_cultural_
participation.
Group of Friends for Culture-Based Climate Action (GFCBCA). 
2023. Emirates Declaration on Cultural-Based Climate 
Action. Dubai, COP28 UAE. https://static1 .squarespace.
com/static/62fbf293c4912c5514ac3b2a/t/65789ec6b 
4318b54f27afa6e/1702403782880/Emirates+Declaration 
+on+Culture+Based+Climate+Action__FINAL.pdf.
––––. 2025. Barcelona Declaration. Barcelona, UNESCO 
World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development – MONDIACULT. https://mondiacult2025.
com/wp-content/uploads/2025/09/Declaration-
Barcelona-GFCBCA-2025.pdf.
Hawkes, J. 2001 . The Fourth Pillar of Sustainability: Culture’s 
Essential Role in Public Planning. Common Ground 
Publishing Pty Ltd and Cultural Development Network. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/200029531_
The_Fourth_Pillar_of_Sustainability_Culture’s_essential_
role_in_public_planning.
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 2023. Ten Years 
Promoting Culture and Creativity: The IDB’s Commitment 
to the Cultural and Creative Industries. Washington, 
D.C., IDB. https://publications.iadb.org/en/ten-years-
promoting-culture-and-creativity-idbs-commitment-cultural-
and-creative-industries.
Ministerio de Cultura. 2025. Cultural Rights Plan: Commitments 
of the 15th Legislative Term. Ministerio de Cultura. 
https://culturepolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/1 1/
Spain-Cultural-Rights-Plan-2025-2027.pdf.
Mulligan, M. 2024. ‘Music subscriber market shares Q3 2023 
report: new momentum’. Midia Research, 8 February. 
https://www.midiaresearch.com/blog/music-subscriber-
market-shares-2023-new-momentum.
Murtin, F. 2024. The Art of Living Well: Cultural Participation 
and Well-Being. OECD Papers on Well-Being and 
Inequalities, Working Paper No. 21 . 
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/the-art-of-living-
well_0219e248-en.html.
Nussbaum, M. 201 1 . Creating Capabilities: The Human 
Development Approach. Belknap Press and Harvard 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt2jbt31 .
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). ‘Cultural and creative sectors’. OECD. https://
www.oecd.org/en/topics/sub-issues/culture-creative-
industries-and-sports/cultural-and-creative-sectors.html.
––––. 2025. ‘Country programmable aid in official development 
assistance (ODA)’. OECD, 21 February. 
https://www.oecd.org/en/data/insights/data-
explainers/2025/02/country-programmable-aid-in-
official-development-assistance.html.
257
Annexes • Bibliography
Our World in Data and Climate Watch. 2025. ‘Greenhouse gas 
emissions by sector, World’. Our World in Data. https://
ourworldindata.org/grapher/ghg-emissions-by-sector.
Sen, A. 1999. Development as Freedom. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press.
UNESCO. 2022. UNESCO World Conference on Cultural 
Policies and Sustainable Development – MONDIACULT 
2022: Final Declaration. Mexico City, UNESCO. 
https://www.unesco.org/sites/default/files/medias/
fichiers/2022/10/6.MONDIACULT_EN_DRAFT%20
FINAL%20DECLARATION_FINAL_1 .pdf. 
––––. 2023. Financial Report of the IFCD for the Period from 
1 January to 31 December 2022. Paris, UNESCO. 
(DCE/23/16.IGC/INF.6). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000384684.
––––. 2025a. UNESCO Global Report on Cultural Policies, 
Culture: The Missing SDG. Paris, UNESCO. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000395504.locale=en.
––––. 2025b. Culture and Climate Action: From Margins to 
Mainstream. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000395681 .locale=en.
––––. 2025c. Outcome Document MONDIACULT 2025 
World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development. Barcelona, UNESCO. 
https://www.unesco.org/sites/default/files/medias/
fichiers/2025/09/EN_MONDIACULT_Outcome_
Document%20Final%2027.09.25.pdf?hub=171 169. 
––––. 2025d. International Fund for Cultural Diversity: voluntary 
contributions by Parties’. UNESCO. https://www.unesco.
org/creativity/en/ifcd/support/parties.
UNESCO and World Bank. 2021 . Cities, Culture, Creativity: 
Leveraging Culture and Creativity for Sustainable 
Urban Development and Inclusive Growth. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000377427.locale=en.
United Nations (UN). ‘The Sustainable Development Goals’. 
UN. https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/
development-goals/.
––––. 2015. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. United Nations General 
Assembly. (A/RES/70/1). 
https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda.
––––. 2022. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2022. 
New York, UN. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/
report/2022/.
––––. 2024. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024. 
New York, UN. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/
report/2024/The-Sustainable-Development-Goals-
Report-2024.pdf.
United Nations Climate Change (UNFCCC). 2025. 
‘Entertainment and Culture for Climate Action’. 
https://unfccc.int/climate-action/sectoral-engagement/
entertainment-and-culture-for-climate-action#tab_home.
United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). 2025. ‘Culture 
and sustainable development: Note by the Secretary-
General’. 23 July. https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/4086970?v=pdf.
World Bank. 2025. ‘Population and GDP by country’. World 
Bank DataBank. https://databank.worldbank.org/
id/29c4df41 .
Chapter 9
Adobe. 2022. Monetization in the Creator Economy. Adobe. 
https://web.archive.org/web/20221207220134/
https:/s23.q4cdn.com/979560357/files/Adobe-Future-
of-Creativity-Monetization-Report.pdf.
Bachtrack. 2025. Bachtrack: Classical Music in 2024. 
Bachtrack. https://bachtrack.com/classical-music-
statistics-january-2025.
Bull, A. 2024. ‘Complacency and misogyny, or positive 
changes that add up to a movement? How the UK 
screen industries are addressing sexual harassment in 
the workplace’. Feminist Media Studies, Vol. 25, No. 2, 
pp. 495-503. https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.202
4.2356538.
Carr, M. and Van Raalte, C. 2025. ‘Women in leadership in 
the creative industries’. Gender, Work and Organization, 
Vol. 35, No. 5, pp. 1709-1714. https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/
gwao.13264.
Centro Cultural de España en Buenos Aires (CCEBA) and 
Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales (FLACSO). 
2021 . Ciclo Cultura y Equidad: Artes, Cultura y Géneros. 
https://flacso.org.ar/publicaciones/ciclo-cultura-y-
equidad-artes-culturas-y-generos/.
Collins, P . and Golding, G. 2024. ‘The right to switch off: taking 
the next steps to tackle ‘always on’ culture’. Institute for 
the Future of Work, 1 1 October. https://www.ifow.org/
news-articles/the-right-to-switch-off-taking-the-next-steps-
to-tackle-the-always-on-culture.
Eisenmann, T., Karjus, A., Sola, M. C., Brinkmann, L., 
Supriyatno, B. I. and Rahwan, I. 2025. ‘Expertise elevates 
AI usage: experimental evidence comparing laypeople 
and professional artists’. Arxiv. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2501 .12374.
Equipo Latinoamericano de Justicia y Género (ELA). 2025. Más 
allá de los números: el impacto del desmantelamiento de 
las políticas de género en Argentina (2023-2025). ELA. 
https://ela.org.ar/publicaciones-documentos/mas-alla-
de-los-numeros-el-impacto-del-desmantelamiento-de-las-
politicas-de-genero-en-argentina-2023-2025/.
258
Global System for Mobile Communications Association 
(GSMA). 2024. The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2024. 
London, GSMA. https://www.gsma.com/r/wp-
content/uploads/2024/05/The-Mobile-Gender-Gap-
Report-2024.pdf.
Hennekam, S. and Bennett, D. 2017. ‘Sexual harassment in the 
creative industries: tolerance, culture and the need for 
change’. Gender, Work & Organization, Vol. 24, No. 4, 
pp. 417-434. https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/gwao.12176.
Hesmondhalgh, D. and Baker, S. 2015. ‘Sex, gender and work 
segregation in the cultural industries’. The Sociological 
Review, Vol. 63, No. 1 , pp. 23-36. 
https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/1467-954X.12238.
Heung, S., Jiang, L., Azenkot, S. and Vashistha, A. 2024. 
‘‘Vulnerable, victimized, and objectified’: understanding 
ableist hate and harassment experienced by disabled 
content creators on social media’. Proceedings of the 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, No. 744, pp. 1-19. New York, Association for 
Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1 145/3613904.3641949.
John, T. and Akbarzai, S. 2024. ‘ Argentina’s Milei bans gender-
inclusive language in official documents’. CNN World, 
6 March. https://edition.cnn.com/2024/02/27/
americas/argentina-milei-bans-gender-inclusive-language-
intl-latam/index.html.
Jones, P ., Verhoeven, D., Dadlani, A., and Zemaityte, V. 
2024. ‘She must be seeing things! Gender disparity 
in camera department networks’. Social Networks, 
Vol. 76, No. 1 , pp. 120-134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socnet.2023.09.004.
McCarry, M., Käkelä, E., Jones, C. and Manoussaki, K. 2023. 
‘The sound of misogyny: sexual harassment and sexual 
violence in the music industry’. Journal of Gender Based 
Violence, Vol. 7. No. 2, pp. 220-234. https://doi.org/10.1
332/239868021X1678467622461 1 .
Mendonca, A., D’Cruz, P . and Noronha, E. 2022. ‘Trolling in 
the cultural and creative industries’. L. R. Salazar (ed.), 
Research Anthology on Combating Cyber-Aggression and 
Online Negativity, pp. 1533-1558. Hershey, IGI Global. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-6684-5594-4.ch078.
MEWEM Europa. ‘ About’. MEWEM Europa. 
https://mewem.eu/about/index.html.
Park, H. 2024. ‘South Korea’s rising deepfake sex crimes 
and recent legal responses’. East Asia Institute. 
http://www.adrnresearch.org/publications/list.
php?at=view&idx=392&ckattempt=1 .
Partridge, J. 2025. ‘What is the DEI rollback and where will it 
spread next?’ The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.
com/us-news/2025/feb/14/diversity-equity-inclusion-
dei-us-trump-google-amazon-walmart.
Šišić, M. and Binışık, D. 2025. ‘Beyond the cuts: how the 
defunding affects feminist and civil society organizations’. 
Heinrich Böll Stiftung, 13 March. https://www.boell.de/
en/2025/03/13/beyond-cuts-how-defunding-affects-
feminist-and-civil-society-organizations.
Stack Overflow. 2022. ‘Developer survey’. Stack Overflow. 
https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#developer-
profile-demographics.
Taylor, S. and Luckman, S. 2024. ‘Mentoring as affective 
practice’. International Journal of Cultural Policy, Vol. 31 , 
No. 2, pp. 253-266. https://doi.org/10.1080/1028663
2.2024.2320427.
UN Women. 2025. Women’s Rights in Review 30 Years after 
Beijing. New York, UN Women. https://www.unwomen.
org/en/digital-library/publications/2025/03/womens-
rights-in-review-30-years-after-beijing.
UNESCO. 2015. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: A Decade 
Promoting the Diversity of Cultural Expressions for 
Development. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000242866.
––––. 2017. Operational Guidelines on the Implementation 
of the Convention in the Digital Environment. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000378132.
––––. 2018. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: Advancing Creativity 
for Development. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000260592.
––––. 2021 . Gender and Creativity: Progress on the Precipice. 
Paris, UNESCO. (2005 Convention Global Report 
Series). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000375706.
––––. 2022. Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000381 137.
––––. 2023. ‘Your Opinion Doesn’t Matter, Anyway’: Exposing 
Technology-Facilitated Gender-Based Violence in an Era of 
Generative AI. Paris, UNESCO. (World Trends in Freedom 
of Expression and Media Development Series). https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000387483.
––––. 2024. ‘Pour des échanges équilibrés des biens et services 
culturels, et l’égalité des genres: The Wake, L ’èveil, Le 
Sillage, Xàll wi’. UNESCO. https://www.unesco.org/fr/
articles/pour-des-echanges-equilibres-des-biens-et-services-
culturels-et-legalite-des-genres-wake-leveil-le.
––––. 2025a. Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
and Promotion of Cultural Expressions: Recommendations 
of the Reflection Group on the diversity of cultural 
expressions in the digital environment. Paris, UNESCO. 
(DCE/25/18.IGC/7). https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000392215_eng.locale=en.
259
Annexes • Bibliography
––––. 2025b. Outcome Document MONDIACULT 2025 
World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable 
Development. Barcelona, Spain, UNESCO.  
https://www.unesco.org/sites/default/files/medias/
fichiers/2025/09/EN_MONDIACULT_Outcome_
Document%20Final%2027.09.25.pdf?hub=171 169. 
––––. 2025c. UNESCO Global Report on Cultural Policies, 
Culture: The Missing SDG. Paris, UNESCO.  
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000395504.locale=en.
––––. 2025d. ‘Closing the gap: UNESCO supports gender 
equality in the cultural and creative sectors’. UNESCO, 2 
July. https://www.unesco.org/creativity/en/articles/
closing-gap-unesco-supports-gender-equality-cultural-and-
creative-sectors.
UNESCO and IRCAI (International Research Centre on Artificial 
Intelligence). 2024. Challenging Systematic Prejudices: 
An Investigation into Gender Bias in Large Language 
Models. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000388971 .
Weinberg, D. and Kapelner, A. 2018. ‘Comparing gender 
discrimination and inequality in indie and traditional 
publishing’. PLOS One, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 1-20. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195298.
Women in Tech. 2023. ‘Gender diversity in the gaming industry’. 
Women in Tech, 25 August. https://www.womenintech.
co.uk/gender-diversity-in-the-gaming-industry/.
Wreyford, N. 2015. ‘Birds of a feather: informal recruitment 
practices and gendered outcomes for screenwriting 
work in the UK film industry’. The Sociological Review, 
Vol. 63, No. 1 , pp. 84-96. https://doi.org/10.1 1 1 1/1467-
954X.12242.
Chapter 10
Afreximbank. 2024. ‘ Afreximbank announces aim to double 
CANEX funding to $2 billion to boost Africa’s creative 
economy’. Afreximbank, 18 October. 
https://www.afreximbank.com/afreximbank-announces-
aim-to-double-canex-funding-to-2-billion-to-boost-africas-
creative-economy/.
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR). 
2019. Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression 
and Access to Information in Africa. Banjul, ACHPR. 
https://achpr.au.int/en/special-mechanisms-reports/
declaration-principles-freedom-expression-2019.
ARTICLE 19. 2024. Artistic Freedom: From the Perspective of 
International Human Rights Law. Sao Paulo, Artigo 19 
Brazil and South America. https://artigo19.org/wp-
content/blogs.dir/24/files/2024/10/digital_ingles_
expressaoartistica.pdf.
––––. 2025. ‘Meta: Prioritise human rights, not politics’. 
ARTICLE 19, 7 January. https://www.article19.org/
resources/meta-prioritise-human-rights-not-politics/.
Artists at Risk Connection (ARC). 2021 . A Safety Guide for 
Artists. ARC. https://artistsatriskconnection.org/wp-
content/uploads/2024/1 1/ARC_SafetyGuide_EN.pdf.
ArtsEquator. 2025. ‘Database’. Southeast Asia Artistic Freedom 
Radar. https://radar.artsequator.com/database/.
Avant-Garde Lawyers. 2022. Artists under Boycott. Paris, Avant-
Garde Lawyers. https://avantgardelawyers.org/white-
paper/.
Biskaabiiyaang. ‘Biskaabiiyaang: the indigenous metaverse’. 
Biskaabiiyaang. https://www.biskaabiiyaang.com/.
Center for the Analysis of Liberty and Authoritarianism (LAUT). 
2025. ‘Emergency agenda, 2019-22’. São Paulo, LAUT. 
https://agendadeemergencia.laut.org.br/en/.
Coordinación Educativa y Cultural Centroamericana (CECC). 
2025. Política Regional para la Promoción y la Protección 
de las Personas Artistas y Trabajadoras de la Cultura de 
la Región SICA al 2030. CECC and Central American 
Integration System (SICA). https://ceccsica.info/wp-
content/uploads/2025/12/PCDA-Region-SICA.-VF.pdf.
Council of the European Union. 2022. EU Work Plan for 
Culture 2023-2026. Brussels, Council of the European 
Union. (15381/22). https://www.consilium.europa.eu/
media/60399/st15381-en22.pdf.
Culture Action Europe. 2025. EU Funding for Culture in the 
Multiannual Financial Framework 2028-2034. Brussels, 
Culture Action Europe. https://cultureactioneurope.org/
wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Future-of-EU-Culture-
Funding_CAE.pdf.
Cuny, L. and Guèvremont, V. 2023. ‘ A European perspective on 
safeguarding the diversity of cultural expressions and 
artistic freedom in the digital environment’. European 
Yearbook on Human Rights 2023, pp. 205-228.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781839704543.009.
Díaz Charquero, P . and Rangel, V. 2023. ‘Informe sobre políticas 
de inteligencia artificial y derechos de autor en América 
Latina’. Fundación Karisma, 7 March. https://web.
karisma.org.co/informe-sobre-politicas-de-inteligencia-
artificial-y-derechos-de-autor-en-america-latina/.
Dickinson v. Turkey. 2021 . ‘Judgment 02.02.2021’. 
European Court of Human Rights, No. 25200/1 1 . 
https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-207951 .
European Commission. 2025. Culture Compass for Europe. 
Brussels, European Commission.  
https://culture.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/
files/2025-1 1/Communication%20-%20Culture%20
Compass%20with%20cover_0.pdf.
260
Fontevecchia and D’Amico v. Argentina. 201 1 . ‘Judgment of 
November 29, 201 1: Merits, reparations, and costs’. 
Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Series C, No. 238. 
https://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/articulos/
seriec_238_ing.pdf.
Freemuse. 2022. The State of Artistic Freedom 2022. 
Freemuse. https://www.freemuse.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/02/saf-report-2022.pdf.
––––. 2023. The State of Artistic Freedom 2023. 
Freemuse. https://www.freemuse.org/wp-content/
uploads/2025/06/SAF23-rebuild-2025.pdf.
––––. 2024. The State of Artistic Freedom 2024. 
Freemuse. https://www.freemuse.org/wp-content/
uploads/2024/09/SAF-Report-2024-small-1 .pdf.
––––. 2025. The State of Artistic Freedom 2025. 
Freemuse. https://www.freemuse.org/wp-content/
uploads/2025/04/SAF-2025_web.pdf.
Gachechiladze v. Georgia. 2021 . ‘Judgment 22.07.2021’. 
European Court of Human Rights, No. 2591/19. 
https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/fre?i=001-21 1 123.
Godioli, A., Jacques, S., Young, J., and Matamoros Fernandez, A. 
2025. What’s in a Joke? Assessing Humor in Free Speech 
Jurisprudence, 1st edn. Forum for Humor and the Law 
and Columbia Global Freedom of Expression. 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15383543.
Government of Canada. 2025. Status of the Artist Act, 
S.C. 1992, c. 33. Ottawa, Department of Justice Canada. 
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/S-19.6/.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2023. The Future of 
Work in the Arts and Entertainment Sector. Geneva, ILO. 
https://www.ilo.org/publications/future-work-arts-and-
entertainment-sector.
Koalisi Seni. 2025a. ‘ Artistic freedom’. Koalisi Seni.  
https://koalisiseni.or.id/en/advocacy/artistic-freedom/.
––––. 2025b. Growing, Embodying: The Condition of Gender-
Diverse Workers in Indonesia’s Art and Creative 
Ecosystems. Jakarta, Koalisi Seni. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000396491 .
Mariya Alekhina and Others v. Russia. 2018. ‘Judgment 
17.7.2018’. European Court of Human Rights, 
No. 38004/12. https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/
fre?i=001-184666.
Maya Kaqchikel Indigenous Peoples of Sumpango et al. 
v. Guatemala. 2022. ‘Judgment of July 27 , 2022: 
Interpretation of the judgment on merits, reparations and 
costs’. Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Series C, 
No. 457. https://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/
articulos/seriec_457_ing.pdf.
Movimento Brasileiro Integrado pela Liberdade de Expressão 
Artística (MOBILE). 2025. ‘Mapa da censura’.  
https://movimentomobile.org.br/mapa-da-censura/.
Nhimbe Trust. 2023. ArtSpeak: A Nhimbe Trust Artistic 
Freedom Report. Bulawayo, Nhimbe Trust.  
https://www.nhimbe.org/sites/default/files/
reportdownloads/A%20Nhimbe%20Trust%20
Artistic%20Freedom%20Report%202023sm-min.pdf.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR). 2023. ‘Speaking out on Gaza / Israel 
must be allowed: UN experts’. OHCHR, 23 November. 
Geneva, OHCHR. https://www.ohchr.org/en/press-
releases/2023/1 1/speaking-out-gaza-israel-must-be-
allowed-un-experts.
Pan-African Network for Artistic Freedom (PANAF). 2025. ‘ About’. 
https://panaf.org/about/.
Pan-African Network for Artistic Freedom (PANAF) and Selam. 
2023. An Assessment of Artistic Freedom: Ethiopia. 
Stockholm, Selam. https://selamethiopia.se/publications-
selam/exploring-art-and-cultures-role-in-artistic-freedom/.
Reitov, O. and Whyatt, J. 2024. The Fragile Triangle of 
Artistic Freedom: A Study of the Documentation and 
Monitoring of Artistic Freedom in the Global Landscape. 
Stuttgart, Institut für Auslandsbeziehungen. 
https://globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/
wp-content/uploads/2024/05/ifa-2024_reitov-
whyatt_artistic-freedom_EN.pdf. 
Safe Havens Freedom Talks. 2025. ‘ Artistic freedom: 
A dynamic visualization of needs and resources’. 
https://sh-ft.org/artistic-freedom/.
Te Hiku Media. 2025. ‘Te Hiku tech’. Te Hiku Media.  
https://tehiku.nz/te-hiku-tech/.
UNESCO. 2019. Artistic Freedom. Paris, UNESCO.  
https://www.unesco.org/creativity/sites/default/files/
medias/fichiers/2023/01/artistic_freedom_pdf_web.pdf.
––––. 2021 . Preliminary Analytical Report on the Impact of 
the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Cultural and Creative 
Industries, and the Findings of the ResiliArt Movement. 
Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000378146.
––––. 2022a. Re|Shaping Cultural Policies: Addressing Culture as 
a Global Public Good. Paris, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000260592.
––––. 2022b. MONDIACULT 2022 Final Declaration. Mexico 
City, UNESCO. https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/
unesco-world-conference-cultural-policies-and-sustainable-
development-mondiacult-2022?hub=758.
261
Annexes • Bibliography
––––. 2023a. ‘UNESCO project in The Gambia empowers 
women artists through enhanced access to funding and 
knowledge’. UNESCO, 2 June. https://www.unesco.org/
en/articles/unesco-project-gambia-empowers-women-
artists-through-enhanced-access-funding-and-knowledge.
––––. 2023b. ‘UNESCO supports the SICA Region in the 
protection of artists and cultural professionals’. UNESCO, 
30 May. https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/unesco-
supports-sica-region-protection-artists-and-cultural-
professionals.
––––. 2023c. Empowering Creativity: Implementing the UNESCO 
1980 Recommendation Concerning the Status of the 
Artist (5th Global Consultation). Paris, UNESCO. https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000387452.
––––. 2024. ‘Designing a regional policy for the protection 
and promotion of the status of artists and cultural 
professionals in Central America’. UNESCO, 14 June. 
https://www.unesco.org/creativity/en/articles/
designing-regional-policy-protection-and-promotion-status-
artists-and-cultural-professionals-central?hub=66775.
––––. 2025a. MONDIACULT 2025 Outcome Document. 
Barcelona, UNESCO. https://www.unesco.org/
sites/default/files/medias/fichiers/2025/09/
EN_MONDIACULT_Outcome_Document%20Final%20
27.09.25.pdf.
––––. 2025b. Protocolos para un uso crìtico de la IA en 
organizaciones culturales: Sobre el panel de diálogo y 
discusión realizado el 20 de agosto de 2025. Montevideo, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000396326.locale=es.
UNESCO and International Labour Organization (ILO). 
2023. Methodological Guide for the Participatory 
Development of a Law on the Status of the Artist. Paris, 
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000387563.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 
2025a. Global Trends: Forced Displacement 
in 2024. Geneva, UNHCR. 
https://doi.org/10.18356/978921 1543605.
––––. 2025b. ‘Refugee data finder’. https://www.unhcr.org/
refugee-statistics.
Valais, S. 2025. The status of artists and cultural and creative 
professionals in Europe: social rights and circulation. 
Strasbourg, IRIS, European Audiovisual Observatory. 
https://rm.coe.int/iris-the-status-of-artists-and-cultural-
and-creative-professionals-in-/488028b282.
Whyatt, S. 2023. Free to Create: Artistic Freedom in Europe. 
Strasbourg, Council of Europe Publishing. https://rm.coe.
int/free-to-create-council-of-europe-report-on-the-freedom-
of-artistic-exp/1680aa2dc0.
Xanthaki, A. 2025. Artificial Intelligence and Creativity. New 
York, UN General Assembly. https://docs.un.org/
en/A/80/278.
262
List of figures and tables
List of figures
Figure 1 .1 Distribution of policies and measures designed through interministerial cooperation, by remit of partnering ministries ........ 27
Figure 1 .2  Mean government expenditure on 08.2 Cultural Services and 08.3 Broadcasting and Publishing Services (Classification of the 
Functions of Government) as a percentage of gross domestic product, by developing and developed countries (2014-2022) ... 30
Figure 1 .3  Proportion of Parties with statistical offices or research bodies evaluating cultural policies, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 32
Figure 1 .4   Most frequently reported types of job creation measures ............................................................. 33
Figure 1 .5   Proportion of Parties with education and training programmes, by type ................................................ 38
Figure 1 .6  Proportion of Parties reporting tertiary and university education degrees, by cultural domain .............................. 39
Figure 1 .7  Proportion of Parties reporting technical and vocational education and training programmes, by cultural domain ............ 39
Figure 1 .8  Proportion of UNESCO Member States with policies, measures or programmes that provide artists capacity building, 
training or other support to monetize their artistic work, by developing and developed countries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Figure 1 .9  Most frequently reported types of policy-making tools  .............................................................. 40
Figure 2 .1   Mean Freedom House ‘free and independent media’ score, by developing and developed countries ......................... 47
Figure 2 .2  Proportion of Parties reporting regulatory authorities monitoring media, and their responsibilities ........................... 51
Figure 2 .3  Proportion of Parties reporting regulatory authorities monitoring media, by media type .................................. 53
Figure 2 .4   Proportion of Parties reporting public service media with a statutory remit to promote a diversity of cultural expressions  ...... 55
Figure 2 .5   Proportion of Parties with policies and measures that support content diversity in programming, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 56
Figure 2 .6  Proportion of Parties reporting domestic content regulations for audio-visual media  ..................................... 58
Figure 2 .7  Proportion of Parties with domestic, regional or linguistic content quotas for subscription video on demand 
and for free-to-air television, by developing and developed countries .................................................. 59
Figure 3 .1  Proportion of Parties with policies, measures or mechanisms supporting the digital transformation of cultural and 
creative industries and institutions, by region ....................................................................... 67
Figure 3 .2  Proportion of the population accessing types of digital content, by developing and developed countries .................... 68
Figure 3 .3  Proportion of Parties with policies and measures ensuring vibrant domestic digital cultural and creative industries 
markets with a diversity of actors of all sizes, by region ............................................................... 70
Figure 3 .4  Proportion of Parties with policies and measures enhancing access and discoverability of domestic cultural content 
in the digital environment, by region ............................................................................. 72
Figure 3 .5 Global share of creators’ income, by income stream (2018-2023) ...................................................... 74
Figure 3 .6  Proportion of Parties with measures and initiatives promoting digital creativity and competencies of artists 
and other cultural professionals working with new technologies, by developing and developed countries ..................... 75
Figure 3 .7  Mean share of the population with basic, intermediate or advanced information and communication technology skills, 
by developing and developed countries (2020-2023) ............................................................... 77
Figure 3 .8  Proportion of Parties that have statistics or studies on access to digital media, by developing and developed countries  ....... 77
Figure 4 .1  Proportion of Parties reporting dialogue mechanisms between public authorities and civil society organizations 
for cultural policy making and/or monitoring, by developing and developed countries ................................... 89
Figure 4 .2  Proportion of Parties reporting policies and measures promoting the diversity of cultural expressions 
which have been elaborated in consultation with civil society organizations, by region .................................... 91
263Annexes • List of figures and tables
Figure 4 .3   Proportion of Parties that submitted a Civil Society Organizations Form as part of their Quadrennial Periodic Report, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 92
Figure 4 .4  Share of measures reported by civil society organizations under each goal of the 2005 Convention, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 94
Figure 4 .5  Proportion of Parties reporting professional organizations and/or trade unions representing artists 
and/or cultural professionals, by cultural domain .................................................................. 96
Figure 4 .6  Proportion of Parties with public authorities that organize or support training and mentoring opportunities in communication, 
advocacy or fundraising for civil society organizations involved in promoting the diversity of cultural expressions, by region .... 98
Figure 4 .7  Proportion of Parties with public funding schemes supporting civil society organizations’ involvement 
in promoting the diversity of cultural expressions, by developing and developed countries ................................ 99
Figure 5 .1  Proportion of Parties reporting policies and measures supporting the outward mobility of artists 
and cultural professionals, by region ............................................................................ 109
Figure 5 .2  Proportion of Parties reporting specific visa policies or other cross-border measures supporting the inward mobility 
of foreign artists and cultural professionals, by region .............................................................. 109
Figure 5 .3  Proportion of Parties reporting public funds supporting the inward and outward mobility of cultural professionals, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 110
Figure 5 .4  Most frequently reported measures, policies, programmes or schemes that support inward artist mobility, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 112
Figure 5 .5  Most frequently reported types of grants and subsidies that support outward artist mobility, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 113
Figure 5 .6  Proportion of Parties reporting public funds specifically supporting the mobility of artists and 
other cultural professionals from or between developing countries, including North-South-South and 
South-South cooperation, by developing and developed countries ..................................................... 116
Figure 6 .1  Exports of cultural goods by domain (2004-2023), based on UNESCO’s 2009 Framework for Cultural Statistics ............. 127
Figure 6 .2  Global cultural goods trade flows, by income-level country groups in 2007 and 2023 ................................... 128
Figure 6 .3  Exports of fine arts, by developing and developed countries (2004-2023) ............................................. 129
Figure 6 .4  Share of personal, cultural and recreational services trade exports, by developed countries (2010-2023) .................... 131
Figure 6 .5  YouTube searches for Nollywood movies worldwide (2019-2024) .................................................... 132
Figure 6 .6  Proportion of Parties reporting export strategies or measures to support the distribution of cultural goods and services, 
by cultural domain ........................................................................................... 133
Figure 6 .7  Inward foreign-direct-investment stock in the arts, recreation and entertainment category, 
by developing and developed countries (2014-2022) .............................................................. 136
Figure 6 .8  Trade promotion and capacity development measures reported by Parties, by income-level country groups  .................. 137
Figure 8 .1  Proportion of Parties where public cultural bodies and agencies responsible for culture or creative industries are involved 
in the design and implementation of national development plans or national sustainable development plans, by region ..... 169
Figure 8 .2  Proportion of Parties that recognize cultural and creative industries in national development plans 
or national sustainable development plans ....................................................................... 169
Figure 8 .3  Percentage of countries using culture to achieve cultural, social, economic and environmental outcomes, 
by developing and developed countries  .......................................................................... 172
Figure 8 .4  Estimated country average of annual production-based emissions of carbon dioxide from the cultural and 
creative industries, in kilograms per capita, by developing and developed countries (2022)  ............................... 175
Figure 8 .5  Proportion of Parties that have implemented cultural industry-based regeneration initiatives and projects at regional, 
urban and/or rural levels, by region ............................................................................. 177
Figure 8 .6  Average density of cultural infrastructure across 244 cities, facilities per 100,000 people, by region  ....................... 178
Figure 8 .7  Proportion of Parties that have implemented policies or measures facilitating participation in cultural life and 
access to diverse cultural facilities and expressions, notably addressing the needs of disadvantaged or vulnerable groups, 
by developing and developed countries ........................................................................... 178
264
Figure 8 .8  Proportion of Parties with development cooperation strategies, including South-South cooperation strategies, 
that recognize the strategic role of creativity and diverse cultural expressions, by developing and developed countries ....... 180
Figure 8 .9  Ten largest culture and recreation Country Programmable Aid recipients, US$ million (2022) ............................. 181
Figure 8 .10  Contributions to the International Fund for Cultural Diversity (2007-2024) ............................................. 181
Figure 9 .1  Gender-related measures reported as a percentage of all reported measures, three-year rolling average  ..................... 191
Figure 9 .2  Proportion of women as heads of national arts or cultural councils among Parties,by developing and developed countries .... 193
Figure 9 .3   Proportion of women artists in major biennalesin their most recent three editions, per biennale .......................... 198
Figure 9 .4   Number of women in the top 100 most performed living composers, global total (2013-2024) ........................... 199
Figure 9 .5   Gender distribution of content creators .......................................................................... 201
Figure 10 .1  Proportion of Parties reporting that their constitution and/or national regulatory frameworks formally acknowledge 
artistic freedom across key dimensions, by developing and developed countries  ......................................... 211
Figure 10 .2  Proportion of Parties reporting initiatives to protect artists at risk or in exile which have been developed 
or supported by public authorities during the last four years, by region ................................................ 215
Figure 10 .3  Proportion of Parties reporting independent bodies are established to receive complaints and/or monitor violations 
and restrictions to artistic freedom, by region ...................................................................... 217
Figure 10 .4  Proportion of Parties having adopted or revised social protection measures that take the professional status of artists 
into account in the last four years, by developing and developed countries  ........................................... 221
Figure 10 .5  Proportion of Parties with measures and initiatives intended to ensure transparent decision making 
on government funding/state grants and awards for artists, by developing and developed countries  ..................... 224
List of tables
Table 1 .1  Percentage of Parties with collective management organizations and reproduction rights organizations 
across cultural domains, by region and by developing and developed countries ......................................... 36
Table 6 .1  Regional shares of audio-visual and related services exports in 2018 and 2022 ........................................ 133
Table 7 .1   Bilateral and regional trade agreements involving at least one Party to the Convention during the period 2021-2024 ....... 149
Table 7 .2 Bilateral Investment Treaties involving at least one Party to the Convention during the period 2021-2024 ................. 154
Table 7 .3  References to the Convention in strategies, action plans and other international texts (selected examples) ................. 155
Table 9 .1  Mobile internet adoption rates for women and gender gaps in mobile internet adoption, by region 
(excluding high-income countries) ............................................................................... 201
Table 10 .1   Most frequently reported types of artists’ groups for which specific support measures exist, by region  ..................... 225
265Annexes • List of figures and tables
Image credits
Cover © Diana Ejaita*
p. 10  © Soner Arkan/Pexels.com
p. 19 © Patrycja Chociej/Unsplash.com
p. 20 © Paul Phung*
p. 22 © Jessica Christina. Headpiece artwork by Mulyana, attire created by Douche, featuring artist from Inspyro Moves*
p. 42 © Anna Ridler/Photographer: Emily Grundon, 2018, installation of Myriad (Tulips)*
p. 62 © Marcelrose. Artwork by Emo de Medeiros/Wikimedia Commons
p. 84 © Victoria Vilasana*
p. 102 © Roberto Reposo/Unsplash.com
p. 104 © Luciana Abait, Off the map*
p. 122 © Isidro Ferrer Soria/Photographers: Hugo Ferrer y Vega Mayor*
p. 142 © Lana Sham/Shutterstock.com*
p. 162 ©  Shinji Turner-Yamamoto, Global Tree Project: HANGING GARDEN, 2010. Dead and live white birches, 
Deconsecrated 19th-century Holy Cross Church (National Register of Historic Places), Cincinnati, OH, USA*
p. 164 © Ben Young, Longing*
p. 184 © Mestiz, Gran Pez Palma*
p. 186 © Henrik Kam Photography Inc., 2 dancers in the hallway of 500 Capp St*
p. 206 ©  NOLI TIMERE by www.rebeccalazier.com – director/choreographer, www.echelman.com – sculptor, 
www.julielemberger.com – photographer*
The images marked with an asterisk (*) in this publication do not fall 
under the abovementioned CC_BY_ SA license and may not be used 
or reproduced without the prior permission of the copyright holders.
267Annexes • Image credits
9 789231 008511
From music and film to literature and design, 
creative expressions give voice to the world’s 
diversity. This diversity, in turn, can only thrive 
when creativity is nurtured by effective policies 
and institutions. 
Twenty years ago, governments and civil 
society came together at UNESCO with a 
shared vision, leading to the adoption of the 
Convention on the Protection and Promotion 
of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions 
– a landmark international treaty that 
continues to guide how countries support 
culture and creativity today. The Re|Shaping 
Policies for Creativity report series monitors 
how this vision is put into action. 
Drawing on data from more than 120 countries, 
this fourth edition analyses the latest trends, 
challenges and opportunities shaping 
creative sectors, as well as the policy 
responses designed to address them. Cultural 
governance today faces mounting pressures 
as digital transformation and deepening 
global inequalities raise fundamental questions 
about who can create and access culture. This 
report offers insights and recommendations to 
inspire policy action, supporting governments, 
institutions and civil society to establish 
the conditions for creativity to flourish. 
R E | SHAPING POLICIES
FOR CREATIVITY