O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E
Rural area sustainable development strategies on
the basis of a cluster approach
Rasul Gusmanov1
|
Eugene Stovba2
|
Alfiya Kuznetsova1
|
Iskander Gusmanov3
|
Timur Taipov1
|
Gulnara Muhametshina2
|
Liana Akhmetova1
1Department of Economics and Management,
Federal State Budgetary Educational
Establishment of Higher Education ‘Bashkir
State Agrarian University’, Ufa, Russian
Federation
2Department of Informatics and Economics,
Birsk branch of Federal State Budgetary
Educational Establishment of Higher
Education ‘Bashkir State University’, Birsk,
Russian Federation
3Department of Finance and Credit, Ufa
branch of the Federal State Budgetary
Educational Institution of Higher Education
‘Financial University under the Government
of the Russian Federation’, Ufa, Russian
Federation
Correspondence
Rasul Gusmanov, Department of Economics
and Management, Federal State Budgetary
Educational Establishment of Higher
Education ‘Bashkir State Agrarian University’,
Ufa, Russian Federation.
Email: rasul.gusmanov@rambler.ru
Funding information
RFBR and the Republic of Bashkortostan
according to the research project “Strategic
Planning of Socio-Economic Development of
Rural Areas of the Republic of Bashkortostan
Based on the Foresight Methodology”, Grant/
Award Number: No. 19-410-020016
Abstract
The study purpose is scientific and methodological substan-
tiation of the effective use of cluster technologies in the
strategic planning of sustainable development of rural terri-
torial structures. The conceptual novelty of the research is
that it provides an algorithm for clustering the socioeco-
nomic development of rural areas by the critical target indi-
cators based on the evaluating features (30 features) to
make homogeneous clusters (four clusters). Also, the study
established methodical approaches and guidelines for the
use of cluster technologies to assess the prospects for sus-
tainable development of the zone-level system of rural
areas as complex socioeconomic structures. The research
used general scientific methods such as a monographic
method, system and cluster analysis techniques, strategic
planning tools, a computational and constructive method,
and abstract–logical and graphical methods. A cluster
approach should be used when designing strategic plans
and programs for the socioeconomic development of rural
municipalities. Cluster technologies should be used as a sys-
tematic tool for the development and implementation of a
strategy for the sustainable development of rural areas. The
key findings are based on the multidimensional grouping of
rural areas and the formation of homogeneous clusters of
rural areas at the zonal level.
Received: 29 April 2021
Revised: 6 August 2021
Accepted: 9 September 2021
DOI: 10.1111/rsp3.12475
© 2021 The Authors. Regional Science Policy & Practice © 2021 Regional Science Association International
778
Reg Sci Policy Pract. 2022;14:778–795.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/rsp3


K E Y W O R D S
regional development, rural areas, strategic planning,
sustainability strategy
J E L C L A S S I F I C A T I O N
P25, R51
1
|
INTRODUCTION
At the present stage, the concept of sustainable development is one of the fundamental methodological approaches
to the study of the phenomenon of rural areas as certain structured local systems. It should be noted that rural areas
turned out to be highly sensitive to the effects and challenges of the external environment; they have low protective
abilities to meet the ongoing crisis and phenomena against the background of turbulence in the development of the
global economy and outbreaks of global pandemics such as the coronavirus pandemic. The theoretical and methodo-
logical background of fundamental issues related to sustainable development of rural areas shows that the interest
of the scientific community in these issues is growing (Bartkowiak, 2017; Bolshakova et al., 2019; Dorosh
et al., 2019; Kurdys-Kujawska & Sompolska-Rzechula, 2020).
Conceptually, rural areas are complex objects of scientific study and purposeful sustainable development,
including both the territorial aspect and the totality of socioeconomic relations, which have temporal and spatial
boundaries. It is beyond doubt that rural areas are a multifaceted concept; they contain production, demographic,
social, economic, institutional, and ecological (natural) components (Podgorskaya et al., 2019; Standar &
Kozera, 2019). It should be emphasized that the sustainable development of rural areas is determined, first of all,
by the maturity of their integration and intrasystem relations. Methodologically, the multidimensionality of the
development of rural areas is due to their diversified development and the diversity of the rural economy
structure; it is determined by the length of the area and the location of settlements as places of residence in the
natural environment.
The study of the key factorial elements of rural areas is of particular importance when considering their complex
nature. The variety of available methodological approaches to the study of rural areas is due to the cross-subject
nature of their fields of operation (Casini et al., 2019; Mazur & Tomashuk, 2019; Tandir et al., 2016). There is no
doubt that today rural areas are constantly affected by internal and external factors while being a systemic formation
of mixed genesis and complex socioeconomic nature. For example, digital technologies are currently one of the key
drivers of rural development (Allanina et al., 2020; Bulat, 2014).
It is important to emphasize that, in developed economies, the social aspect is considered as a determinant when
identifying rural areas (Marinas, 2015). Having high population density and agricultural employment, rural areas may
include small towns, which are centers of food processing.
It should be emphasized that the figures and the nature of employment of the local population are direct criteria
for identifying rural areas based on the methodology developed by the statistical service of the European Union
(Borawska, 2017). Through the example of Great Britain, the effective use of the rurality index method for identify-
ing rural areas can be noted; it is based on the calculation of an integral indicator that combines strategic parameters,
namely the location of rural areas relative to the urban center, migration, employment structure, and population
density.
Conceptually, rural areas (by analogy with taxonomic units of a higher level) can be described as an open system
of a certain technological chain: ‘natural resources (environment)’, ‘economy (production system)’, ‘society (social
sphere and infrastructure)’. The development mechanisms of these territorial systems involve their ability to mitigate
destructive external fluctuations and enhance favorable external impulses, which, ultimately, ensures their transition
to a new qualitative state.
GUSMANOV ET AL.
779


The methodological interrelationship of the sustainable development targets is based on the continuous system
interaction of the most crucial components, ‘nature–population–economy’ (Castro-Arce & Vanclay, 2020; Yanbo
et al., 2021). The concept of sustainable development is currently being quantified and digitized, and it can be con-
sidered a consensual official paradigm of human development. The key ‘distinction’ of the categorial component of
sustainable development is the functioning of rural areas; the areas are considered from multiple aspects and based
on axiomatics of the category (Gorbenkova et al., 2018).
Sustainable development is achieved through the purposeful transition of the rural community and society to a
qualitatively new level of functioning (Li et al., 2021; Zang et al., 2020). In turn, the multi-aspect character of sustain-
able development is determined by the complexity in choosing its target indicators and strategic parameters.
Figure 1 provides an overview of current methodological trends of studies on sustainable development of rural
areas.
The research ‘gaps’ in the current scientific literature are, firstly, the substantiation of the choice of target indica-
tors and strategic vectors of sustainable development for the specific management decisions and, secondly, the devel-
opment of unified standard cluster mechanisms and algorithms for the cluster scenarios of sustainable economic and
social development of rural entities. There is no doubt that a new paradigm of sustainable development of rural areas
can be developed based on a detailed study of their properties, features, and driving forces (Ciani et al., 2016; Dragoi
et al., 2017; Su et al., 2019). Today, the implementation of a cluster-oriented policy is one of the key imperatives of
increasing the competitiveness of rural producers and implementing a strategy for the sustainable development of rural
areas. In developed countries, the network structure of agrarian economy is based on clusters; they act as ‘points of
growth’ of rural areas and their ‘breakthrough’ advancement in the production of agri-food products (Hammouda
et al., 2018). In terms of the development of rural areas and the application of the cluster mechanism, there are differ-
ent types of clusters, namely agro-bio-energy, agricultural (agricultural and agro-industrial clusters), social (socially ori-
ented clusters), and innovative (ultrastructural, scientific and innovative, innovative, and borrowed clusters).
International experience shows that the regions that activate clustering processes and initiate new cluster
structures become the state economic development leaders. In the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) countries, clusters are becoming the basis for depressed rural areas and regional innovation
systems. The sustainable development strategies used in most US states rely on the wide use of cluster technologies
and focus on creating homogeneous clusters.
It should be noted that, in Canada, Japan, and the United States, the projected cluster strategies fit into the context
of national and regional strategies for the development of agrarian economy, and the cluster approach is effectively
used to encourage agribusinesses to introduce innovative and digital technologies in the production of agricultural
products. In Canada, cluster strategies are coordinated and overseen by the National Research Council based on the
platform of technology cluster initiatives. A characteristic feature of Japanese clusters is the use of the systems of sub-
contract links between large, medium-sized, and small enterprises in the production of competitive agri-food products.
At the current stage, the cluster philosophy is increasingly appreciated. Its status is growing, and the cluster
solutions are being actively introduced into the conceptual scope of the national strategic plans to develop various
economic sectors. The cluster approach determines the trinity of the ‘nature–population–economy’ relationship in
terms of methodology. It strengthens the innovative concept when designing strategies for the sustainable develop-
ment of territorial entities.
Today, the formed clusters are a dynamically developing multifunctional and dialectical category. M. Porter’s
methodology formed the basis for the universal provisions of clusterization, and its distinguishing feature is the
sector components of rural areas (Porter, 1998). The grouped clusters form a framework that reflects the main
sustainable development trends of the social sphere and crucial economic sectors.
The purpose of the study is to substantiate the application of the cluster approach when designing a strategy for
sustainable development of rural areas. The research tasks require the definition of the approaches to the typifica-
tion of rural areas and the development of clustering tools as a key imperative for designing a strategy for sustainable
development of rural areas.
780
GUSMANOV ET AL.


2
|
METHODS AND MATERIALS
We believe that the use of the cluster approach when developing a sustainable development strategy should be
based on the typology of rural areas. The multidimensionality of rural areas determines their typification in order to
develop appropriate measures to ensure their balanced sustainable development. From a scientific point of view,
typification is the process of identifying rural areas with similar production, economic, and social characteristics for
FIGURE 1
Current methodological trends of studies on the phenomenon of sustainable rural development.
Note: The figure was developed by the authors based on their research
GUSMANOV ET AL.
781


the further achievement of the differentiated agricultural policy goals (Chatzinikolaou et al., 2015; Oliveira &
Turcˇínková, 2019). Thus, based on the principle of remoteness from economic regions, rural areas (districts) can be
classified into three types: remote areas with unfavorable climatic conditions, low incomes, and low density of the
rural population; intermediate rural areas, which have relatively favorable natural and economic conditions; and eco-
nomically integrated areas, which are characterized by a high level of employment and a high density of rural popula-
tion, as well as developed rural infrastructure.
The above approach was applied in the framework of the study based on the example of rural areas of a
typical agro-industrial region of the Russian Federation, namely the Republic of Bashkortostan (Russian
Federation). Sustainable development of rural areas as socioeconomic systems is of key importance for the stra-
tegic goals and future prosperity of Bashkortostan; this is due to the fact that in the region there are 817 rural
settlements united into 54 municipal districts, and the rural population is 1.5 million people. From a scientific
point of view, the system of rural areas of the Non-Black Soil Zone of the Republic is a model area for achiev-
ing sustainable development and effective growth. We believe that, in the current production and economic
conditions, the top priority of the rural areas under consideration is the adoption of strategic anti-crisis measures
based on the cluster approach.
We have developed a step-by-step clustering algorithm based on key typological features that reflects the socio-
economic status of rural areas and determines the formation of their cluster profile (Figure 2). The algorithm was
developed as part of the implementation of the scientific project of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research
‘Strategic planning of socio-economic development of rural areas based on the foresight methodology’, carried out
from 2019 to the present.
FIGURE 2
Algorithm for clustering rural areas by socioeconomic development indicators. Note: The figure was
developed by the authors based on their research
782
GUSMANOV ET AL.


The clustering algorithm is based on the sequential implementation of the following stages:
1. Data collection to ensure clusterization based on the use of the Rosstat data characterizing the socioeconomic
status of the rural territorial structures under consideration.
2. Clustering by the indicators reflecting the socioeconomic status of rural areas, namely grouping of homogeneous
clusters of rural areas at the zonal level.
3. Verification of the reliability and adequacy of the results of clustering based on the qualitative assessment of the
feasibility of statistical data grouping into clusters when using the methods of analysis of variance.
4. Designing a cluster profile of rural areas to identify ‘leaders’ and ‘outsiders’ of rural areas in terms of their socio-
economic development.
5. Expert assessments of the clustering results based on the implementation of the foresight methodology involving
the key stakeholders and actors of the area under consideration.
Graphically, it can be described like this (Figure 2):
Let us consider the stages of the implementation of the clustering algorithm described above in methodological
and practical terms in more detail. At the first stage of the algorithm implementation, we collected the data to carry
out clustering based on the use of the Rosstat data characterizing the development of the rural territorial structures
under study during the period from 2011 to 2019. The research relied on the database compiled from the official
statistical and factual materials of the federal and regional bodies of Rosstat, materials of the RF Ministry of Agricul-
ture and the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Bashkortostan, annual reports of agricultural organizations of
Bashkortostan for 2011–2019.
The parameters under study were selected based on the availability of statistical data described in the official
statistical books of Bashkortostan ‘Socio-economic status of municipal districts and urban districts of the Republic of
Bashkortostan’. In our opinion, the use of official sources of information, namely statistical data of the Federal State
Statistics Service of Bashkortostan, allows us to most objectively assess the current socioeconomic development
level of the rural territorial structures of the region under study.
The second stage of the algorithm implementation involved grouping of the rural areas according to 30 key tar-
get indicators, namely: the indicators of agriculture, construction and trade, and social sphere, described in Figure 3.
The natural resource and soil-climatic conditions of Bashkortostan are very diverse; some areas are not favorable for
sustainable agricultural production; the territory has distinct horizontal and vertical zoning.
We clustered 22 rural areas of the Non-Black Soil Zone of the region under consideration. In accordance with
soil characteristics, the territory of Bashkortostan (like the territory of the Russian Federation) is subdivided into the
Non-Black Soil and Black Soil Zones. In the middle of the past century, the entire territory of the region was divided
into zones. At this stage, the agricultural zoning of Bashkortostan was performed following the socioeconomic
changes and complex processes of reforming and developing agriculture in the region and the country. The essential
need for the most effective use of the republic’s entire natural resource potential made the territory zoning scientifi-
cally appropriate. The borders of administrative districts determined the zone borders, grouping the areas similar in
soil and geographical features and natural and economic conditions to form zones of the same type. The research is
feasible given the fact that the rural areas have approximately the same climatic and soil conditions. Taking this into
account, the object of the study is not the whole territory of Bashkortostan, but a part – the Non-Black Soil Zone.
The target indicators of socioeconomic development (Table 2) we used to cluster the rural areas under study
were selected based on the foresight methodology during expert surveys among stakeholders and actors of the area.
These studies were carried out in 2019 during the implementation of the pre-foresight activities based on the gener-
alization of the expert focus group assessments (Gusmanov et al., 2020). The foresight research methodology pur-
posefully identified and used experts’ knowledge. The experts were municipal and legislative authorities, public
organizations, managers and specialists of municipal companies, agricultural organizational forms (corporate farms,
peasant farms), and members of small and large agribusinesses of Bashkortostan. In total, the research employed
GUSMANOV ET AL.
783


three focus groups; each focus group of experts consisted of 15–20 people, with the total number being 56 people.
During immersion-type workshops, each group was engaged in discussion and analysis independently of other expert
groups.
It is beyond argument that the selection of cluster components was performed with due regard to the funda-
mental features of the phenomenon of the clusters being grouped, namely when forming unique competitive advan-
tages of rural areas based on the development of their competitive environment and integration ties.
FIGURE 3
Target indicators of socioeconomic development used when clustering rural areas (own development).
Note: The figure was developed by the authors based on their research
784
GUSMANOV ET AL.


3
|
RESULTS
Our previous studies have shown that the rural areas under study are characterized by positive social and economic
prerequisites for sustainable development of clusters (Gusmanov et al., 2019, 2020). It is important to emphasize
that, when forming clusters, it is necessary to take into account the spatial structure of the interaction of the studied
objects (rural areas) due to the fact that, over time, clusters can be created, deepened, replenished, reduced, com-
pressed, and disbanded.
Figure 4 provides a graphical representation of the cluster distribution of rural areas.
Clusterization of the rural areas at the zonal level made it possible to reliably assess their current socioeconomic
status. A brief description of the clusters formed is presented in Table 1.
It should be noted that, based on the multidimensional grouping, the following pattern is confirmed: in the clus-
ters with the lowest population density, the indicators of social development of rural areas are lower. This conclusion
was made on the basis of the comparison of the data in Table 1 and Table 2. For example, cluster IV is characterized
by both the lowest density of the rural population (3.1 people per km2) and the lowest socioeconomic development
indicators of the rural areas.
The analysis of the clustering results showed that most of the average cluster parameters reflecting the develop-
ment of the social sphere and infrastructure of rural areas in the Non-Black Soil Zone of Bashkortostan are lower
FIGURE 4
Cluster distribution of rural areas of the Non-Black Soil Zone of Bashkortostan by socioeconomic
development indicators. Note: The figure was developed by the authors based on their research
GUSMANOV ET AL.
785


compared with regional averages, namely when comparing the indicators related to medical and health care services,
which is of exceptional importance in the context of the pandemic. We specifically compared the indicators of the
four clusters of rural areas (Figure 3) to identify their potential (strong, average, weak).
Table 2 presents averaged indicators within each of the four clusters. The boundary values of these socioeco-
nomic indicators are determined by the corresponding extreme (minimum and maximum) values of the indicators of
individual rural areas in the cluster display and, in our opinion, can be applied in further studies aimed at designing a
sustainable development strategy for the medium and long term. The indicators presented in Table 2 correspond to
the target indicators, which, as we have already noted, were formed based on the expert assessment during the
implementation of the pre-foresight stage. The methodology and procedures of foresight research were considered
TABLE 1
Brief characteristics of clusters I–IV
Cluster
Number of rural
areas, units
Number of rural
settlements, units
Number of rural
communities, units
Rural population density,
people per km2
I
6
82
497
15.7
II
3
47
277
8.3
III
10
135
641
9.8
IV
3
44
190
3.1
Note: The table was derived by the authors based on their research.
TABLE 2
Selected indicators of the socioeconomic development of rural areas of the Non-Black Soil Zone of
Bashkortostan in the clusters under discussion
Indicators
Cluster no.
I
II
III
IV
Crops yield in farms of all types (weight after processing), hundredweight
per hectare of harvested area
19.1
15.1
15.4
18.2
Application of mineral fertilizers, kg of active ingredient per hectare of the
area under cultivation
10.2
8.8
3.4
–
Productivity (annual average milk yield per cow) in agricultural
organizations, kg
4,572
3,991
4,198
1,688
Availability of places in preschool educational institutions for children
aged 1–6 years per 1,000 children, place
582
417
669
580
Coverage of children aged 1–6 years by preschool educational
institutions, %
64
42
66
61
Per 10,000 people:
- Number of hospital beds, units
39
57
59
50
- Number of nursing staff, people
77
91
98
100
- Number of doctors, people
23
22
25
24
Indicators of the availability of urban amenities in rural areas, %:
- Water supply
58
74
59
20
- Sewage
49
46
47
17
- Central heating
78
84
69
52
- Hot water supply
41
47
38
15
- Gas
75
82
75
60
Note: The table was derived by the authors based on their research.
786
GUSMANOV ET AL.


in more detail in Gusmanov et al. (2019, 2020). In turn, Table 2 is based on the implementation of the second stage
of research, clustering by the indicators reflecting the socioeconomic status of rural areas shown in Figure 2.
At the third stage of the validation of reliability and adequacy of the results of cluster solutions, the k-means
clustering method was used; it is effectively implemented in Statistica for carrying out a multivariate statistical analy-
sis of territorial entities of various hierarchical levels. The advantages of the Statistica software are a user-friendly
interface, the ability to process unlimited sized files, high data processing speed, increased calculation accuracy, sim-
ple data import (export), and easy access to databases. The weakness of the statistical processing software package
is its inefficiency in implementing original algorithms. The use of the k-means clustering method determines the
method for calculating the Euclidean distances between the objects under study, takes into account the peculiarities
of the initial indicators, and scientifically interprets the cluster solutions obtained. The assessment of the Euclidean
distances between the four clusters reflects the relative distance between cluster II and cluster IV and the relative
proximity of clusters I and III (Figures 5, 6).
FIGURE 5
Average values of cluster I and cluster III. Note: The figure was derived by the authors based on their
research
FIGURE 6
Average values of cluster II and cluster IV. Note: The figure was derived by the authors based on their
research
GUSMANOV ET AL.
787


The stages and procedures of the analysis of variance (ANOVA) are based on the qualitative assessment of the
feasibility of grouping the statistical data used into homogeneous clusters (rural areas) in the zonal environment
under study. The analysis of variance allowed us:
• to consider different variations of the cluster distribution of the aggregate of the areas under study according to
typological characteristics and to subsequently construct their possible multidimensional groupings (from two to
six clusters);
• to determine the quality of the formation of homogeneous clusters for the rural areas being studied and scientifi-
cally interpret the cluster solutions obtained.
During the fourth stage of the implementation of the clustering algorithm, we identified ‘leaders’ and ‘outsiders’ of
rural areas in terms of socioeconomic development (Table 3). Particularly, the mechanism for distinguishing ‘leaders’
and, accordingly, ‘outsiders’ of rural areas from the rest of the studied rural territorial structures in each cluster was
implemented on the basis of the maximum (minimum) indicators reflecting agricultural production per capita (thou-
sand roubles); crop yield in farms of all types (weight after processing, hundredweight per hectare of harvested area);
productivity (annual average milk yield per cow) in agricultural organizations (kg); coverage of children aged 1–6 years
by preschool educational institutions (%); number of doctors per 10,000 people.
Firstly, the practical consequences of distinguishing the rural territorial structures into leaders and outsiders
involve the identification of the most socially and economically favorable rural areas as ‘potential growth points’ of
the agrarian sector (‘leaders’), and the need to pay particular attention to depressed rural areas as a kind of ‘incuba-
tors of poverty’ (‘outsiders’). According to the expert assessment, in the medium and long term, the leaders can
TABLE 3
‘Leaders’ and ‘outsiders’ of the rural territories of the Non-Black Soil Zone of Bashkortostan in the
framework of the cluster sustainable development scenario for the period up to 2030
Rural area
Cluster no.
I
II
III
IV
Agricultural production per capita, thousand rubles.
Leaders
Burayevsky
Blagoveshchensky
Baltachevsky
Zilairsky
Outsiders
Iglinsky
Yanaulsky
Mishkinsky
Beloretsky
Crops yield in farms of all types (weight after processing),
Hundredweight per hectare of harvested area
Leaders
Nurimanovsky
Yanaulsky
Duvansky
Burzyansky
Outsiders
Burayevsky
Blagoveshchensky
Kiginsky
Zilairsky
Productivity (annual average milk yield per cow) in agricultural organizations, kg
Leaders
Nurimanovsky
Yanaulsky
Duvansky
Burzyansky
Outsiders
Kaltasinsky
Blagoveshchensky
Belokataisky
Zilairsky
Coverage of children aged 1–6 years by preschool educational institutions, %
Leaders
Burayevsky
Birsky
Duvansky
Zilairsky
Outsiders
Iglinsky
Blagoveshchensky
Karaidelsky
Beloretsky
Number of doctors per 10,000 people, people
Leaders
Burayevsky
Birsky
Salavatsky
Beloretsky
Outsiders
Iglinsky
Blagoveshchensky
Belokataisky
Burzyansky
Note: The table was derived by the authors based on their research.
788
GUSMANOV ET AL.


significantly increase their strategic parameters and target indicators reflecting sustainable development of the major
rural economy sectors.
Secondly, the outsiders of rural areas should be provided with state support on a selective basis in order to elim-
inate the asymmetry and development imbalances, and subsequently equalize the operation of the socioeconomic
components of the areas under study. According to the expert assessment, outsiders of rural areas will be mainly
characterized by low indicators of the quality and standard of living of the population. There is no doubt that the use
of these practical recommendations will positively affect the prospective strategic development of the rural social
sphere and the region’s economy.
The research examined different variations of the cluster distribution of the studied set of objects by typological
characteristics. It formed the potential complex groupings (from two to six clusters) in dynamics for the three periods
(2011–2013, 2014–2016, and 2017–2019). As a result, the following sustainable trends for the socioeconomic
development of rural areas in the Non-Black Soil Zone were identified: the constancy of the cluster distribution of
most rural areas, the outpacing social and economic growth in two rural areas, and the deterioration of the socioeco-
nomic situation in eight rural areas (Figure 7).
The most important component of a sustainable development strategy is a focus on obtaining a certain synergis-
tic effect from the use of the natural resource and production potential of rural areas when creating ‘points of
growth’, clusters and specialized food production zones. The formation of cluster systems in the rural areas that are
outsiders in terms of development will increase the efficiency of agricultural production and create new jobs.
At the final stage of the implementation of the clustering algorithm along with an expert assessment of the clus-
tering results and the use of foresight technologies, the key implications of effective clustering of rural areas in terms
of their socioeconomic development were formulated; they are shown in Figure 8.
The implications of the efficiency of clustering rural areas by socioeconomic development indicators were based
on the use of foresight technologies. In practical terms, the effectiveness of clustering was measured by a group of
FIGURE 7
Dynamics of cluster distribution of rural areas by target indicators of socioeconomic development in
2011–2019. Note: The figure was developed by the authors based on their research
GUSMANOV ET AL.
789


experts, and on this conceptual framework, 12 lines for the development of rural areas were formed. These are
shown in Figure 5. In practice, the application of this concept will make it possible to perform on-the-spot analysis
and will improve the efficiency and quality of municipal governance of the development of rural areas. In turn, the
limitations of the cluster approach are a low level of competition within the formed clusters; issues of providing
information technology (IT) support to the executive authorities and entrepreneurship for applying the cluster
approach and cluster-related activities; poor understanding of the benefits of the co-competition synergetic effect;
and the state’s minor role in supporting cluster initiatives.
FIGURE 8
Implications of the efficiency of clustering rural areas by socioeconomic development indicators.
Note: The figure was developed by the authors based on their research
790
GUSMANOV ET AL.


We believe that, in further research, the lines of clustering efficiency developed based on the expert assess-
ments provided by key actors and stakeholders can be used to adjust and clarify the parameters and target indicators
of the projected strategy for the development of rural areas. These are the major vector of the sustainable socioeco-
nomic climate of rural territorial entities from the perspective of a systematic approach. In our opinion, future studies
on assessing the prospects of sustainable rural development based on a cluster approach can be directly related to
the functioning of the digital economy and large-scale digitalization in rural areas.
Our vision of building a new structure for sustainable development of rural areas based on the cluster approach
is focused on the innovative component of cluster development design strategies. The cluster structure of rural areas
is an open socioeconomic system, and it can be modified in accordance with the evolutionary dynamics of the rural
continuum. At the same time, each cluster should interact not only with stakeholders but also with other groups of
key actors in rural areas.
4
|
DISCUSSION
We believe that the use of cluster technologies should be one of the fundamental approaches to designing a strategy
for sustainable development of rural areas. According to a study conducted by the Russian Cluster Observatory
(RCO) at the Higher School of Economics, more than 2,000 pilot innovative territorial clusters have been created in
the Russian Federation, and there are 43 cluster development centers (RCO, 2021). At the same time, there are only
eight clusters in Russian regions that are associated with the development of agriculture and the food industry.
It is important to emphasize that previous studies devoted to clusters did not always take into account the indi-
vidual characteristics of the development of rural areas and did not analyze various time periods by key target indica-
tors to determine sustainable trends in the socioeconomic development of rural areas when carrying out typification
(Akhmadeev et al., 2019; Novikov, 2019). Thus, when conducting research grouping the municipalities of Bashkorto-
stan (2016), an integral indicator including the share of non-tax and tax revenues of local budgets that make up the
municipalities’ own revenues, average monthly wages, rate of natural and migration increase, volumes of shipped
goods of their own production, and investment in fixed assets per capita was used (Government of the Republic of
Bashkortostan, 2018). The use of this integral indicator allowed differentiation of all municipalities of the republic
according to several levels of socioeconomic development.
The clusters formed within the framework of the study differ from the multidimensional groupings and integra-
tion associations developed previously, first of all, in their strategic focus on sustainable development. In contrast to
the available methodological approaches, the results of the cluster study determine the formation of the concept of
‘smart specialization’ of rural producers, which makes it possible to concentrate efforts not on certain sectors of the
development of the agrarian economy but on certain types of activities of economic entities (agricultural
formations).
We believe that, when conducting cluster studies, a systematic approach should be applied to initially analyze
the current socioeconomic status of the aggregate of the rural areas being considered and assess the prospects for
their development as potential cluster structures. The use of cluster technologies determines the ‘cores’ and ‘growth
poles’ of clusters around which innovative high-tech enterprises of the agri-food sector, a network of sociocultural
facilities, technoparks, and nonagricultural business structures are created. In this respect, the ‘poles of growth’ are
the points of potential location of agricultural production and social facilities, which allow the optimization of the
system of rural areas through clustering. At the same time, an increase in the differentiation and spatial polarization
of rural areas may lead to certain disparities in socioeconomic development between the ‘center’ and ‘periphery’ of
rural areas.
If we follow general principles of the theory of convergence, ‘poor’ (‘target’) territories have higher rates of eco-
nomic growth compared with ‘rich’ (‘reference’) territories, and, therefore, in the long term, this will equalize their
levels of economic development. In other words, effective strategic management of rural areas based on the
GUSMANOV ET AL.
791


implementation of cluster solutions will allow reorienting loss-making agricultural organizations through the rapid
introduction of innovative and digital technologies to all agricultural formations located within the clusters. In this
case, the innovative component of the clustering effect is determined by a decrease in the costs associated with the
commercialization of innovations and implementation of digital technologies and an increase in the share of innova-
tive products produced by agricultural formations.
The introduction of practical recommendations for the clusters created determines the effectiveness of the
implementation of strategic programs for sustainable development of rural areas. This idea is confirmed by the con-
cept of ‘mutual and cumulative conditionality’ by G. Myrdal, according to which economic growth factors are
interdependent and, therefore, variations of one factor will cause changes in other factors. In this perspective, the
achievement of efficiency presupposes the development of the rural production sphere and, in particular, a signifi-
cant increase in the production of agri-food products and the food self-sufficiency ratio in the rural area.
The key difference between our study and previous research (Chibilev et al., 2015; Kudryavtseva &
Olaniyi, 2019; Rajovic & Bulatovic, 2015) is consideration of the relationships between all categories of agricultural
formations located within rural areas, and the algorithm we developed allows us to assess the degree of sustainable
development and create a ‘cluster profile’ of each rural area type. The methodological approaches and strategies
aimed at the formation of homogeneous clusters of rural areas described in the study can be used for clustering rural
areas in other countries and regions that have similar production conditions.
5
|
CONCLUSIONS
It is important to emphasize that the identification of resources for sustainable development of rural areas should be
based on the methodology of cluster philosophy and the conceptual choice of the fundamental features of the phe-
nomenon of clusters with due regard to agricultural zoning when assessing cluster components – indicators
reflecting current development level of the economy, social sphere, and infrastructure of rural areas. The formation
of homogeneous clusters should be based on characteristics such as geographical concentration, consistency,
uniqueness, territorial community, relative homogeneity of the specialization of the economy, and socioeconomic
potential of rural areas.
It can be concluded that multidimensional clustering can be performed in terms of natural and agricultural zones
based on the critical rural development indicators. The cluster approach specifies the database for comprehensive
and appropriate research of the rural area actual state and defines target indicators of the sustainable development
strategy. The authors have shown that identifying resources for sustainable rural development should be based on a
conceptual choice of the principal features of the cluster phenomenon, taking into account agricultural zoning. They
are crucial for a comprehensive assessment of cluster components – indicators reflecting the current development
of the rural economy, social sphere, and infrastructure.
The implementation of the clustering algorithm described in the study allows us:
• to group rural areas according to the major socioeconomic characteristics at the zonal level, as well as to identify
the strengths and weaknesses of the development of grouped clusters;
• to identify structural dynamic changes in the socioeconomic development of rural areas for a specific period of
time;
• to identify priority socioeconomic development areas of individual rural areas and the virtual clusters created.
There is no doubt that sustainable development of rural areas can be achieved as a result of their clustering and, in
our opinion, it is necessary to introduce an active cluster policy in the available regional strategies. The implementa-
tion of the clustering algorithm according to the key target indicators reflecting the socioeconomic status of rural
areas, and the selection of four homogeneous clusters, has determined the following conclusions:
792
GUSMANOV ET AL.


• social regularity is confirmed; thus, in the clusters with the lowest rural population density, there are lower indica-
tors of the development of rural areas;
• successful agricultural organizations create ‘integrators’ and ‘cores’ mainly for cluster I and III, and their balanced
development determines the potential for the formation of new clusters in accordance with the evolutionary
dynamics of the rural continuum. Enterprises and organizations processing agricultural raw materials and agri-
food products are considered as ‘satellites’ of the clusters;
• clusters with a strategic focus on sustainable development allow the formation of unique competencies of rural
areas based on the use of their exclusive competitive advantages and the development of integration ties.
The authors’ vision for a new framework of the rural area functioning based on the cluster technologies emphasizes
the innovative component in the cluster system of designing a sustainable development strategy. The subjects inter-
acting in clusters produce positive external effects that enhance the competitiveness with other cluster subjects and
activate collaboration processes based on the maximum use of the production potential of farms, and ensure ‘break-
through’ progress in creating specialized food production zones within the clusters.
Thus, a cluster approach is one of the fundamental approaches to the formation of a strategy for the develop-
ment of rural areas; the application of the approach determines a consistent transition from the ‘policy of equaliza-
tion’ to the principle of ‘polarized’ (‘focused’) development of rural areas. The use of cluster technologies in
strategic management will improve the quality of decisions made at the municipal level and contribute to the forma-
tion of a clear vision of the future sustainable development of rural areas.
Specifically, the following research limitations restrict the implementation of the strategy described:
• available resources (taking into account travel constraints and the impossibility of broader coverage of expert
opinions due to the bans and restrictions in the context of the coronavirus pandemic);
• the number of rural areas under consideration (22 units);
• socioeconomic zonal environment (in particular, the Non-Black Soil Zone of Bashkortostan);
• time frame of the study.
There is no doubt that the clusters created are characterized by common conditions, factors, and problems of sus-
tainable development. One of the further development vectors can be the design of the boundary values of the tar-
get indicators of the cluster scenario characterizing the socioeconomic development of rural territorial structures.
This design will make it possible to highlight the main directions in the field of sustainable development of rural
areas. We believe that our study will make a valuable contribution to the clarification and replenishment of methodo-
logical approaches and strategies used for clustering rural areas when implementing their sustainable development
strategy.
FUNDING
The reported study was funded by RFBR and the Republic of Bashkortostan according to the research project
‘Strategic Planning of Socio-Economic Development of Rural Areas of the Republic of Bashkortostan Based on the
Foresight Methodology’, No. 19-410-020016.
ORCID
Rasul Gusmanov
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3692-2819
REFERENCES
Akhmadeev, R., Redkin, A., Glubokova, N., Bykanova, O., Malakhova, L., & Rogov, A. (2019). Agro-industrial cluster:
Supporting the food security of the developing market economy. Entrepreneurship and Sustainability Issues, 7(2),
1149–1170. https://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2019.7.2(25)
GUSMANOV ET AL.
793


Allanina, L. M., Smirnova, E. A., Kalafatov, E. A., Shadskaja, I. G., & Shirokovskikh, S. A. (2020). Sustainable development of
rural areas: Increasing employment in the context of digital technologies development. Journal of Advanced Research in
Dynamical and Control Systems, 12(4), 1069–1076. https://doi.org/10.5373/JARDCS/V12SP4/20201580
Bartkowiak, N. (2017). The diversity of socioeconomic development of rural areas in Poland in the Western borderland and
the problem of post-state farm localities. Oeconomia Copernicana, 8(3), 417–431. https://doi.org/10.24136/oc.v8i3.26
Bolshakova, Y. A., Gusev, A. N., Gruzdeva, V. V., Kurilova, A. A., & Ponedilchuk, T. V. (2019). Specifics of modern manage-
ment of sustainable development in rural areas. Dilemas Contemporáneos: Educacion, Política Y Valore, 6(Special), 84.
Borawska, M. (2017). Rural areas in public statistics. Collegium of Economic Analysis Annals, 44, 275–286.
Bulat, P.(2014). About the detonation engine. American Journal of Applied Sciences, 11(8), 1357–1364. https://doi.org/10.
3844/ajassp.2014.1357.1364
Casini, L., Boncinelli, F., Contini, C., Gerini, F., & Scozzafava, G. (2019). A multicriteria approach for well-being assessment in
rural areas. Social Indicators Research, 143(1), 411–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-018-1978-0
Castro-Arce, K., & Vanclay, F. (2020). Transformative social innovation for sustainable rural development: An analytical
framework to assist community-based initiatives. Journal of Rural Studies, 74, 45–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.
2019.11.010
Chatzinikolaou, P., Bournaris, T., Kiomourtzi, F., Moulogianni, C., & Manos, B. (2015). Classification and ranking rural areas in
Greece based on technical, economic and social indicators of the agricultural holdings. International Journal of Business
Innovation and Research, 9(4), 455–469. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIR.2015.070178
Chibilev, A. A., Petrishchev, V. P., Cherkasova, Y. V., & Akhmetov, R. S. (2015). Cluster differentiation of municipal districts
of Orenburg oblast by features of rural settlement pattern. Regional Research of Russia, 5(3), 263–269. https://doi.org/
10.1134/S2079970515030041
Ciani, A., Gambardella, A., & Pociovalisteanu, D. M. (2016). Circular economy and sustainable rural development. Theory and
best practice: A challenge for Romania. Annals-Economy Series, 1, 52–56.
Dorosh, Y., Barvinskyi, A., Kupriyanchyk, I., Kravchenko, O., & Saliuta, V. (2019). Optimization of the agricultural land structure
as the basis of sustainable development of rural areas. Land Management, Cadastre and Land Monitoring, 4(25), 4–13.
Dragoi, A. E., Bâlgar, A. C., & Pencea, S. (2017). Public policies for sustainable rural development: Evidence from China and
Romania. Global Economic Observer, 5(1), 102.
Gorbenkova, E., Shcherbina, E., & Belal, A. (2018). Rural areas: Critical drivers for sustainable development. IFAC-Papers
OnLine, 51, 786–790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.11.195
Government of the Republic of Bashkortostan. (2018). Decree No. 624 “On the Strategy of Socio-Economic Development
of the Republic of Bashkortostan for the Period up to 2030”. Available at: https://npa.bashkortostan.ru/22444/.
(Accessed 12 January 2021).
Gusmanov, R., Askarov, A., Lukyanova, M., Kovshov, V., & Stovba, E. (2020). Strategic planning of rural development based
on foresight methodologies. Scientifica, 2020, 10. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/5195104
Gusmanov, R. U., Stovba, E. V., Idrisova, A. T., & Yapparova, A. N. (2019). Use of Foresight in Forming a Rural Territory
Development Strategy. In Modern tools for sustainable development of territories. Special topic: Project Management in the
regions of Russia: European proceedings of social and Behavioural sciences (MTSDT 2019) (pp. 550–556). Saint Petersburg,
Russia: Future Academy.
Hammouda, M., Wery, J., Darbin, T., & Belhouchette, H. (2018). Agricultural activity concept for simulating strategic agricul-
tural production decisions: Case study of weed resistance to herbicide treatments in South-West France. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 155, 167–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.09.036
Kudryavtseva, T., & Olaniyi, E. O. (2019). Identification and analysis of the cluster structure of a territory and its impact on
regional development: An example of Russia. Journal of Advanced Research in Law and Economics, 10, 1322. https://doi.
org/10.14505//jarle.v10.4(42).33
Kurdys-Kujawska, A., & Sompolska-Rzechula, A. (2020). Subsidization of entrepreneurship in rural areas in Poland: Scale,
effects and regional diversity. European Research Studies, 23(2), 246–263. https://doi.org/10.35808/ersj/1592
Li, X., Yang, H., Jia, J., Shen, Y., & Liu, J. (2021). Index system of sustainable rural development based on the concept of eco-
logical livability. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 86, 106478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2020.106478
Marinas, L. E. (2015). Returns on EU funding for human capital development in rural areas. Revista de Management Comparat
Internațional, 16(4), 491–505.
Mazur, K., & Tomashuk, I. (2019). Governance and regulation as an indispensable condition for developing the potential of
rural areas. Baltic Journal of Economic Studies, 5(5), 67–78.
Novikov, I. (2019). Regional aspects of the development of clustering in the dairy branch. Comparative Economic Research,
22(4), 91–109. https://doi.org/10.2478/cer-2019-0034
Oliveira, P., & Turcˇínková, J. (2019). Human capital, innovation and internationalization of micro and small enterprises in
rural territory – A case study. Acta Universitatisagriculturae et Silviculturaemendelianaebrunensis, 67(2), 545–563. https://
doi.org/10.11118/actaun201967020545
794
GUSMANOV ET AL.


Podgorskaya, S. V., Podvesovskii, A. G., Isaev, R. A., & Antonova, N. I. (2019). Fuzzy cognitive models for socio-economic
systems as applied to a management model for integrated development of rural areas. Business Informatics, 13(3), 7–19.
https://doi.org/10.17323/1998-0663.2019.3.7.19
Porter, M. (1998). On competition. Boston: Harvard Business School.
Rajovic, G., & Bulatovic, J. (2015). Theoretical approach to rural areas with a focus on typology of settlement in the
European Union and rural development in Montenegro. Hyperion Economic Journal, 3(3), 24.
RCO. (2021). Russian Cluster Observatory (RCO) at the Higher School of Economics: official website. Available at: https://
cluster.hse.ru/. (Accessed 12 January 2021).
Standar, A., & Kozera, A. (2019). The role of local finance in overcoming socioeconomic inequalities in polish rural areas. Sus-
tainability, 11(20), 5848. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11205848
Su, T., Yu, Y., Chen, Y., & Zhang, J. (2019). The experience, dilemma, and solutions of sustainable development of inclusive
finance in rural China: Based on the perspective of synergy. Sustainability, 11(21), 5984. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su11215984
Tandir, N., Konakli, Z., & Bajramovic, S. (2016). Supporting the theory on the potentials of immobile resources for creating
competitive advantages in rural areas. Journal of Academic Research in Economics, 8(3), 419–438. https://doi.org/10.
6007/IJAREMS/v5-i4/2320
Yanbo, Q., Guanghui, J., Wenqiu, M., & Zitong, L. (2021). How does the rural settlement transition contribute to shaping sus-
tainable rural development? Evidence from Shandong, China. Journal of Rural Studies, 82, 279–293. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jrurstud.2021.01.027
Zang, Y., Liu, Y., Yang, Y., Woods, M., & Fois, F. (2020). Rural decline or restructuring? Implications for sustainability transi-
tions in rural China. Land Use Policy, 94, 104531. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.104531
How to cite this article: Gusmanov, R., Stovba, E., Kuznetsova, A., Gusmanov, I., Taipov, T., Muhametshina,
G., & Akhmetova, L. (2022). Rural area sustainable development strategies on the basis of a cluster approach.
Regional Science Policy & Practice, 14(4), 778–795. https://doi.org/10.1111/rsp3.12475
GUSMANOV ET AL.
795


Resumen. El propósito de este estudio es la fundamentación científica y metodológica del uso eficaz de las
tecnologías de cluster (conglomeración) en la planificación estratégica del desarrollo sostenible de estructuras ter-
ritoriales rurales. La novedad conceptual de la investigación es que proporciona un algoritmo para la conglomeración
del desarrollo socioeconómico de zonas rurales por indicadores objetivo críticos basados en las características de
evaluación (30 características) para hacer (cuatro) clusters homogéneos. Asimismo, el estudio estableció enfoques
metódicos y directrices para el uso de tecnologías de cluster con el fin de evaluar las perspectivas de desarrollo
sostenible del sistema zonal de áreas rurales como estructuras socioeconómicas complejas. La investigación utilizó
métodos científicos generales como un método monográfico, técnicas de análisis de sistemas y clusters, herramientas
de planificación estratégica, un método computacional y constructivo, y métodos abstracto‐lógicos y gráficos. Se
sugiere utilizar un enfoque de cluster cuando se requiera diseñar planes y programas estratégicos para el desarrollo
socioeconómico de municipios rurales. Las tecnologías de cluster deberían utilizarse como herramientas sistemáticas
para el desarrollo y la aplicación de una estrategia de desarrollo sostenible de zonas rurales. Los hallazgos principales
se basan en la agrupación multidimensional de las zonas rurales y la formación de clusters homogéneos de zonas
rurales a nivel zonal.
抄録:
本稿では、農村地域の構造の持続可能な発展の戦略的計画におけるクラスター技術の効果的利用を科学的
および方法論的に実証する。本研究の概念的な新規性は、均質なクラスター(4つのクラスター)を作るための評価特
徴(30の特徴)に基づく重要な目標の指標によって農村地域の社会経済発展をクラスター化するアルゴリズムを提
供することである。さらに、本研究では複雑な社会経済構造としての農村地域のゾーンレベルシステムの持続可
能な発展の見込みを評価するためにクラスター技術を利用する方法とガイドラインを確立した。研究には、モノ
グラフ法、システムおよびクラスター分析技術、戦略的計画ツール、計算的構築法、抽象的論理的および図式的
方法などの一般的な科学的方法を用いた。農村部の自治体の社会経済開発のための戦略的計画やプログラムの作
成する際には、クラスターアプローチを用いるべきである。クラスター技術は、農村地域における持続可能な発
展のための戦略の開発と実施の体系的ツールとして使用するべきである。主な知見は、農村地域の多次元分類と
ゾーンレベルでの農村地域の均質なクラスターの形成に基づいている。
DOI: 10.1111/rsp3.12475
© 2021 The Authors. Regional Science Policy & Practice © 2021 Regional Science Association International
