Towards the Construction of Territorial Intelligence Tourism Concept in Latin America 
José  Luis Cornejo-Ortega* , Rodrigo Espinoza-Sá nchez , José  Alejandro Ló pez-Sá nchez
Centro Universitario de la Costa, Universidad de Guadalajara, Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco 48280, Mé xico 
Corresponding Author Email: jluis.cornejo@academicos.udg.mx
Copyright: ©2024 The authors. This article is published by IIETA and is licensed under the CC BY 4.0 license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
https://doi.org/10.18280/ijsdp.190422 ABSTRACT 
Received: 20 November 2023 
Revised: 14 March 2024 
Accepted: 12 April 2024 
Available online: 28 April 2024 
The objective of this research is to analyze from the Latin American perspective (Colombia, 
Costa Rica and Mexico), the construct of Territorial Intelligence Tourism concept. The 
methodological tool chosen, given the characteristics of the research carried out, has been the 
realization of a remote expert panel, which has allowed validating the methodology proposed 
to strengthen, through the concept of territorial intelligence and its relationship with tourism. 
The responses to the interviews were analyzed through the ATLAS.ti 22 software. Within the 
code table of the expert groups, the frequencies of words that stood out the most with th e 
answers are concentrated, giving 399 co-occurrences in codes, 257 routings and 174 densities. 
Part of the construct of the concept of Territorial Intelligence Tourism concept in the three 
participating countries (Mexico, Colombia and Costa Rica) of this study are located around 
Territorial Intelligence, where the categories are directly related to the three countries, these 
being: sustainable development, global community, tourism, urban development and 
development of science, technology and innovation. 
Keywords: 
intelligent territory, tourism, Latin 
America 
1. INTRODUCTION
Some of the problems that society is currently experiencing 
are due to the prevailing economic model, based on 
consumption, where unlimited growth is the maxim that 
cannibalizes natural and cultural resources, and leads to 
increasingly pronounced social inequalities. A society that 
seeks to solve these differences by means of measures that are 
not only economic but also integral, must act inte lligently 
given the degree of existing knowledge. It is, in this context 
that the concept of "territorial intelligence (TI)" arises, with 
the three elements that define it: sustainable development, 
governance and information and communication technologies 
(ICT) [1]. 
Today numerous organizations and institutions promote the 
progress of Territorial Intelligence. One of the supranational 
organizations and promoter of research in this field is 
Coordination Action of the European Network of Territorial 
Intelligence (CAENTI), leader in the study and development 
of TI. According to Ortoll [2], territorial intelligence refers to 
the knowledge needed to understand territorial dynamics and 
structures, as well as the instruments used for the generation 
and use of this knowledge. All this, in order to guarantee and 
promote sustainable territorial development. Its main 
objective is to promote new forms of relationships between 
different actors involved in a territory, since applying 
territorial intelligence policies or initiatives c an constitute a 
differentiating axis between one territory and another, 
contributing to the development of the region and by extension 
to its companies and to the wellbeing of society in general" 
[3]. 
The scenarios that have been created, served for the 
discussion, scientific and technological development of 
territorial intelligence. 
"From the European school, three programmatic axes are 
worked on: 1) the development of theoretical references on 
territorial intelligence, 2) the design and validation of methods 
and 3) the development of technological tools oriented to the 
application of territorial intelligence systems for diverse 
actors, problems and contexts. From the perspective of this 
group, various conceptions of TI are identified" [4]. 
"From the Latin American school guided by Horacio 
Bozzano, the axes are: 1) TI as a strategy for the sustainable 
development of territories; 2) a process based on the 
construction of people into subjects, of banal spaces into 
territories and of vague ideas  into concrete projects, and 3) 
aims to work for identities, needs and future scenarios [4]". 
TI is the application of Competitive Intelligence at local, 
regional or state level, in order to know better the territory and 
to be able to reach acceptable levels of development and 
sustained economic growth. TI takes into account the 
information of the environment and from its interpretation 
designs and carries out improvement actions related to the 
territory [3]. 
Territorial development does not depend only on the 
"purely technological" capabilities that have been developed 
in the region, but also on a set of "social capabilities", which 
are reflected not only in the quality of governance of the 
regional innovation system, but also in the values, beliefs and 
institutions that encourage and drive the active participation of 
society in the processes of development and regional learning 
[5]. 
International Journal of Sustainable Development and 
Planning 
Vol. 19, No. 4, April, 2024, pp. 1447-1455 
Journal homepage: http://iieta.org/journals/ijsdp 
1447

One of territorial intelligence objectives, within the 
challenges linked to territorial sustainability and the 
application of ICT, is the co -construction of a territory, 
respecting the needs and expectations from a local perspective, 
territorial sustainability and the application of ICT. Is the co -
construction of a territory, respecting the needs and 
expectations from a local perspective, in line with the global -
local relationship, as an indispensable condition for the 
development of a territory from a loca l perspective. 
Considering the singularities and the projection that same 
territory offers in the globalization paradigm, understanding 
that the tourist space is not a unique element, since there are a 
multitude of resources integrated in multiple territor ial forms 
according to the previous characteristics of the incorporated 
space and the conditions of appropriation according to the 
actors in the presence of capitals, ideologies, and cultural 
patterns [6, 7]. 
Despite this scarce interest in the field of tourism, it is 
interesting to plan the development of a tourist destination 
from the perspective of territorial intelligence, in which the 
actors are the main "intelligent entities" capable of shaping a 
strategy, monitoring the results and implementing lines of 
future action; capable of enhancing the value of tourist 
destinations and, therefore, strengthening a territory, offering 
opportunities and prospects for structural change, 
accompanied by population wellbeing [8]. 
In this sense, the objective of this research is to analyze from 
the Latin American perspective (Colombia, Costa Rica and 
Mexico), the construct of Territorial Intelligence Tourism 
concept. 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
The variables to assess community resilience in tourist the 
concept and tools of TI originated in the late 1980s in response 
to the needs of a group of territorial stakeholders working on 
projects to combat poverty [9]. In 1989, the absence of 
territorial plans based on participation, the demand for critical 
approaches in the field of sustainable development, the 
revolution of information and communication technologies, 
led to the emergence in Europe (Besanç on, France) by the 
"Catalyse" method [10], whose m ain objective was the 
creation of collective intelligences through various tools 
(diagnostic and evaluation), in order to enable the actors to 
elaborate, argue, animate and evaluate sustainable 
development projects [1]. The two fundamental aspects that 
will mark other definitions: the scientific approach and the 
actors-territorial community [11-19]. 
The scientific approach in territorial intelligence has the 
function of integrating and developing multidisciplinary 
knowledge and methods necessary to understand territorial 
structures, territorial systems and territorial dynamics [20]. It 
follows that IT  cannot be seen as a discipline, it is not the 
simple sum of knowledge, but is shaped as a set of knowledge 
obtained through observation and structured reasoning [1]. 
Tourism destinations, as spaces whose competitiveness 
depends on the overall quality of their territory (environment, 
landscape, business fabric, infrastructure, public facilities and 
services, heritage, etc.), have not been unaware of this concept, 
and th e expression tourism governance has gained strength 
[21]. 
In this regard, in recent years there has been a growing 
number of scientific approaches to the application of the TI 
approach to tourism activity [22]. 
The actors-territorial community suppose the second pillar 
of IT; in fact, this is defined as a process that is based on the 
understanding that articulates knowledge, being essential the 
co-participation, co-construction and collaboration carried out 
by the different actors [15, 17, 23]. 
The definition used by ENTI states that "Territorial 
Intelligence is the science aimed at sustainable development 
and whose subject is the territorial community" [14]. Frediani 
[17] also proposes that territorial intelligence is a way of doing
science. However, authors such as Girardot [24], Devillet and
Breuer [13] and Sá nchez  et al.  [18], who propose that
territorial intelligence is a scientific approach due to its
multidisciplinary nature, do not propose it as a science.
The tools and methods developed from territorial 
intelligence are based on the close collaboration of territorial 
actors and research teams, focused on a research -action 
dynamic to provide real solutions to current problems. Most of 
the tools that have bee n developed by ENTI and by the 
interdisciplinary research team Territory Actors and 
Governance for Transformation (TAG) in Latin America, have 
been designed to be used by a group of actors acting on the 
same problem or space. Such tools are characterized b y 
combining qualitative, quantitative and spatial techniques 
based on ICT's [1]. 
From this perspective in Latin America there are already 
some TI initiatives as is the case of Argentina, Colombia and 
now Mexico is incorporated from the tourism vision to TI [25-
27]. However, at the global level the conceptualization of this 
TI in question and the ways of how to interrelate the tourism 
dimension for the development of such territory continues to 
proliferate [1, 28]. 
In Latin America, the TAG team bases its tools on the 
Understanding, Intelligence and Territorial Development 
(UITD) Methodological Perspective, whose objective is to 
build among local actors research methods and territorial 
intervention instruments that s ystematically accompany the: 
image of the future, strategy that will lead to it and obtaining 
collective achievements [15]. 
2.1 Territorial intelligence and tourism 
As recognized by Luque et al. [29], tourism has been a 
sector scarcely addressed by the methodologies of territorial 
intelligence; there are only a few projects in this line in 
Uruguay, Argentina and Morocco, framed in the development 
of tools for the promotion of sustainable tourism initiatives at 
the local level. 
Tourism projects have been scarce, in fact, only five actions 
have been found that combine territorial intelligence and 
tourism: 
(1) Uruguay (Punta del Este) in 2009, where work was
carried out to generate employment, promote ecological and 
social innovation, and enhance the value of the destination's 
natural and cultural resources;  
(2) Uruguay (Lavalleja) in 2010, where tourism was
addressed with the aim of conserving biodiversity and cultural 
heritage, and investigating its impact on the quality of 
population life;  
(3) Argentina (La Plata) in 2012, it is about rescuing
heritage assets that are linked to the city and its social practices; 
(4) Argentina, the "Parador ecoló gico La Posada" is carried
out to revalue cultural and natural heritage and generate links 
with local stakeholders;  
1448
(5) Argentina (Santa Fé  and Paraná ) in 2011, the project
"Organization of Territorial Intelligence, for Sustainable 
Tourism in the RMSP" was carried out [1]. 
Of this series of territorial intelligence initiatives focused on 
tourism, the last two have been analyzed in detail, which, like 
the others, seek to be promoted and developed by the host 
communities themselves [19]. Despite this scarce interest in 
the field of tourism, it is interesting to plan the development of 
a tourist destination from the perspective of TI, in which the 
actors are the main "intelligent entities" capable of shaping a 
strategy, monitoring the results and implementing lines of 
future act ion; capable of enhancing the value of tourist 
destinations [8]. 
From the perspective of the relationship between territorial 
intelligence and tourism, we are witnessing a paradigm shift 
linked to the valorization of the tourist territory by tourists and 
tourism producing agents, generating tourist attractions in 
which there is a tendency to connect history, tourist identity, 
environmental characteristics and, in general, resources and 
activities disjointed from the economic activity of the territory 
[8]. 
3. METHODOLOGY
The methodological tool chosen, given the characteristics of 
the research carried out, has been the realization of a remote 
expert panel, which has allowed validating the methodology 
proposed to strengthen, through the concept of territorial 
intelligence and its relationship with tourism. The panel of 
experts can be def ined as a group of independent specialists 
with experience in the topic to be evaluated, who are asked to 
make a consensus judgment on that topic [30-33]. 
The group of experts that participated in this research 
consisted of nine experts, 4 from Colombia, 2 from Costa Rica 
and 3 from Mexico. It was established as a sine qua non  
condition that the participating experts should be people with 
recognized knowledge in the subject under evaluation, i.e. 
territorial intelligence applied to a territory, in this case to 
tourist destinations. 
A group of remote experts was chosen because of the 
linkage of having previously worked with researchers from 
Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico. 
The study focused on obtaining empirical knowledge and 
subjective experiences of key actors through interviews, 
whereby this qualitative methodological approach allows to 
explore in depth the perceptions, experiences and lived 
realities of the participants , providing an in -depth 
understanding of the general ideologies and significant events 
in their statements [34]. In this way the study focuses on key 
aspects that are representative of the diverse realities of the 
concept of TI in the Latin American contex t, although the 
sample may not be extensive in a quantitative approach, the 
depth and relevance of the experiences in the qualitative 
approach compensate for its numerical limitation, ensuring 
that the perspectives are meaningful and relevant to the study 
of TI. 
For this research, experts in different topics related to 
territorial intelligence and tourism were consulted in order to 
broaden the perspective and take into account elements of each 
of the topics, the characteristics of the interview are presented 
in Table 1. 
Table 1. Semi-structured interview 
Expert Interview Format . Territorial Intelligence and 
Tourism 
Instrument: Semi-structured interview 
Interview No: 
Date: 
Place: 
Objective: To recognize how the different dynamics 
associated with the territory intervene in territorial 
intelligence in tourism. 
Justification: Territorial intelligence is the improvement to 
the dialogue between the territory and society. Society, it is 
when knowledge and information become concrete and 
begin to play a very important role in the interpretation of 
the territory dynam ics. based on multiple factors and 
variables from very important role in the interpretation of 
the dynamics of a territory from multiple factors and 
variables from which an endless number of relationships 
with a high social sense are derived. 
The possibility of the existence of technological platforms 
that allow the communication of people's knowledge about 
their territories, tourism and their feedback is very broad 
and valuable; the challenge is to identify the appropriate 
method to achieve it. For this purpose, a series of interviews 
were conducted aimed at understanding territorial 
intelligence from different approaches to the territory, in 
order to understand the dynamics associated with it and how 
to intervene it. 
Questions 
1. What is Territorial Intelligence for you?
2. Do you agree that people are the pillar of Territorial
intelligence?
Why do you agree?
3. How do you think tourism is related to territorial
intelligence?
4. In order to dynamism territorial intelligence from
tourism, would it be pertinent to use ICTs in a participatory
manner.
5. Do you believe that people's perception of tourism can be
better supported scientifically through ICTs?
6. What are the aspects, elements or variables of tourism
that should be taken into account in your territory?
7. Can they be monitored through ICTs?
8. Do you believe that the community in your territory is
interested in these aspects, elements or variables?
9. Do you believe that participation (from the monitoring of
these variables in tourism) should be remunerated in some
way?
How?
10. Would you be willing to participate in the construction
of a participation process with ICT's as a contribution to
territorial intelligence in tourism?
Source: Own elaboration 
The procedure at the time of applying the interview was 
done through the selection of experts and the sending of the 
interview via email, with a follow-up through telephone calls, 
thus verifying that the wording of the interview was clear and 
verifying com pliance with the times and responses of these 
experts, for subsequent processing and analysis of results, 
Atlas.ti© software was used. 
1449
 
The purpose of the main functions of the program is to 
accommodate the theory-building procedures. In this sense, it 
facilitates the organization of the analysis through functions 
that allow segmenting quotations, conceptualizing, recording 
reflections, categorizing, relating processes and showing the 
theory that is constructed through diagrams. All these first - 
and second -order procedu res give the analysis greater 
explanatory power for the research. 
Finally, the responses to the interviews were analyzed 
through the ATLAS.ti 22 [35] software, given that it includes 
a set of tools that allow the management, extraction, 
exploration, and restructuring of significant data elements 
[36]. Which allowed identifying those codes (linked citations) 
that need to be saturated, this is possible through the function: 
codes-primary-documents-tables-networks, which show the 
number of citations that each code has, their co -occurrences 
(link between the citations), densi ties (relationships that are 
generated between the linked codes) and rooting (citations that 
are held with that code). 
Although there are other tools such as NVivo and 
MaxQDA; which offer their own strengths and characteristics, 
ATLAS.ti was selected for its specific alignment with the 
methodological and theoretical needs for the study of IT [37]. 
Its focus on grounded theory and content analysis, along with 
its flexibility and depth in handling qualitative data, makes it 
a more suitable tool for our analysis, facilitating a richer and 
more detailed understanding of the data obtained. 
The study adopted an interpretive theoretical approach, 
based on the premise that cultural systems of meaning 
influence the perception and creation of subjective and social 
reality, recognizing the importance of shaping individual and 
collective experiences [38]. Therefore, the data analysis 
process was designed to capture and understand these cultural 
and social complexities, allowing for an in -depth 
interpretation of the TI. 
The data analysis conducted in the research followed a 
qualitative methodological approach; detailed and structured 
where each interview was carefully examined to ensure 
understanding and extraction of relevant information from 
each key stakeholder. Under this meticulous approach it was 
ensured that each piece of data was considered, providing a 
solid basis for subsequent IT analysis in ATLAS.ti software; 
facilitating the categorization and in -depth analysis of the 
elements that constitute this concept as e xpressed in the 
interview transcripts. 
Therefore, this software function facilitates the application 
of the content saturation of each code and category, as 
proposed in the Grounded Theory and as shown in the 
following Table 2 of the operationalization of the object of 
study analyzed. 
The applicability of ATLAS.ti in diverse areas of 
knowledge and research forms is evidenced by its successful 
use in different types of research, such as the analysis of 
interviews, surveys and student work, citing specific studies as 
examples [39 -42]. Therefore, it not only demonstrates the 
versatility of the tool, but also for its ability to contribute to the 
understanding and analysis of complex qualitative data 
structures, allowing to discuss in detail the results obtained 
with ATLAS.ti in the c ontext of the relevant theoretical 
literature of IT and strengthening the contribution of existing 
knowledge [43, 44]. 
The purpose of the main functions of the program is to 
accommodate the theory building procedures. In this sense, it 
facilitates the organization of the analysis through functions 
that allow: segment citations, conceptualize, record 
reflections, categorize , relate processes and show the theory 
that is built through diagrams or networks. All these first and 
second order procedures give the analysis greater explanatory 
power for research [35]. 
The research implied that perception and the construction of 
subjective reality vary in importance and manifestation among 
different groups and contexts. Therefore, the 
operationalization of this concept implies identifying and 
defining the specific compon ents of TI, determining how its 
components influence the perception and experience of key 
stakeholders. 
 
Table 2. Operationalization of the object of study of the construct of the concept of territorial intelligence  
 
Analysis Unit Interviewees Dimension Categories Subcategories 
Territorial 
intelligence 
Group of 
experts 
Construct of the concept of tourism territorial 
intelligence in Latin America 
Colombia. 
Costa 
Rica. 
Mexico. 
Global community. Sustainable 
development. 
Tourism. 
Urban Development. 
Development of science, technology 
and innovation. 
Source: Own elaboration 
 
 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSION  
 
For the analysis of the results, codes were generated for the 
linking of the information of the construct of the IT concept, 
this provided a summarized vision of the descriptions 
according to the categories and subcategories considered in the 
interviews, likewise, the frequency of the co -occurrences of 
the codes generated by the rooting and densities of the 
responses provided by the groups of experts were quantified. 
Within the code table of the expert groups, the frequencies 
of words that stood out the most with the answers are 
concentrated, giving 399 co -occurrences in codes, 257 
routings and 174 densities. The yellow dot indicates that 
everything was around the object of study; ITEM. The green 
dots are the categories, being the home countries of the expert 
groups. The red dots are the subcategories. The blue dots are 
the significant elements that arose from the unit of analysis of 
the answers (Table 3). 
Finally, a network was created (as shown in Figure 1) that 
provides an overview of the entities of the linked codes, 
showing each of the results of the expert groups in the 
construction of the IT concept. In the same way, the meanings 
of the network connectors are shown; A: It is associated with; 
G: is part of; A: contradicts. 
 
 
1450
 
Table 3. Codes of the responses of the expert groups 
 
Codes (25) Colombia Costa Rica Mexico Totals Grounded Density 
● Academic institutions 8 8 7 23 15 5 
● Artificial intelligence 4 0 7 11 8 4 
● Big data 4 3 2 8 6 5 
● Circular economy 3 8 2 12 7 3 
● Colombia 4 0 0 4 4 6 
● Community and its habitat 16 8 9 33 24 5 
● Companies 0 13 2 14 6 3 
● Costa Rica 0 5 0 5 2 6 
● Covid-19 3 5 4 12 7 3 
● Cultural 2 3 4 8 5 3 
● Cultural transformation 4 8 2 13 8 5 
● Development of science, technology, and innovation 11 3 4 17 14 14 
● Digital education 7 8 6 20 13 5 
● Economic 5 5 7 18 11 5 
● Entrepreneurship 0 5 2 7 3 5 
● Environmental 2 3 6 10 6 3 
● Gig economy 7 5 7 20 13 5 
● Global community 13 13 9 35 23 19 
● México 0 0 6 6 3 6 
● Quality of life 4 10 11 25 14 5 
● Social 3 8 11 22 12 5 
● Sustainable development 6 8 6 19 12 18 
● Territorial intelligence 1 3 2 5 3 3 
● Tourism 21 5 13 39 30 17 
● Urban development 5 3 4 11 8 16 
Totals 133 133 133 399 257 174 
Source: Own elaboration 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Linking network of codes for the construct of the concept of tourism territorial intelligence in Latin America  
Source: Own elaboration 
 
Part of the construct of the concept of tourism IT in the three 
participating countries (Mexico, Colombia and Costa Rica) of 
this study are located around IT, where the categories are 
directly related to the three countries, these being: sustainable 
development, global community, tourism, urban development 
and development of science, technology and innovation. From 
these categories in the network, the codes that were generated 
were in the sense of the perspectives of the group of experts in 
the analysis of their responses. 
 
4.1 Colombia 
 
In the group of experts from Colombia, their results showed 
that IT has to do with the management of space, the 
transformations of the social conditions of the community and 
its habitat, of which they seek to improve the living conditions 
of urban communities and rural, in turn, the benefit of IT must 
be supported by technology and innovation, since they are 
important elements that manage to transform cultural 
traditions and at the same time change social relations in all 
areas. Likewise, t hey redefine the current thinking of water 
waste and waste management, emphasizing green cities, 
specifically the circular economy and agroecology. 
Regarding the capacity of the IT construct for the 
articulation of the agents involved in the development of a 
territory, they mention that one of the essential elements is the 
work in coordination for the fulfillment of collective 
objectives, where the co mmunity acts as an important pillar 
for obtaining information, joining efforts and the main 
strategists in favor of tourism for the benefit of the 
communities, these being important in the knowledge of the 
territory and promotion of their tourist activities. 
1451
In addition, they consider  that knowledge  in  IT  requires 
understanding and  planning different  dynamics from  each 
region, as well as their  techniques for  creating  knowledge, 
being the  fundamental  people  in this  process, because their 
intelligence is closely linked to the rational condition of the 
human being.  Therefore,  the plans that are designed  and 
intended for the tourism sector and like any economic activity, 
a strategic  direction  process  must  be  considered  so  that  its 
analysis identifies and evaluates the impact of all exogenous 
and endogenous variables of the sector. 
Therefore, they  mentioned  that  there  must  be  a political 
agreement or collective agreement between the actors of the 
territory for the efficient use of natural resources through legal 
mechanisms and territorial planning, which lead to social and 
economic use  for  the  well-being of the  community,  local 
community, Equally important, institutional conditions  must 
be fostered so that people can access technical, technological 
and higher education,  allowing  the  activation  and  collective 
participation of community actors, without neglecting critical 
and scientific thinking. 
4.2 Costa Rica 
The group of experts from Costa Rica, IT must be linked to 
the interaction between the different entities of the State and 
society, who disclose their strategic plans and the actions to be 
followed in compliance with the different actions in regarding 
tourism, giving as an example the official institutions, where 
their strategic plans are contemplated, their programs aimed at 
companies and  that people  from local  communities  are 
included, adding all efforts for a superstructure,  carrying out 
their laws and  incentives  for  benefit to  the actions  of its 
resources, without  leaving aside  the  responsible 
accompaniment of all the people involved in the action plans 
in the face of real needs and the effects of COVID-19. 
Another point mentioned was ICT,  where they mentioned 
that its impacts influence the strategic direction of companies 
and people, being a necessary element for the operation and 
internal administration of  the company,  where  different 
marketing strategies  can  be  carried  out and  among others. 
Actions with a direct  interaction between  client-company. 
Therefore, current  companies,  as of  the  pandemic,  sanitary 
security measures were implemented for safe destinations and 
actively participated  with local  communities,  not  only  in 
promoting them, but also in verifying and providing incentives 
to those who formulate and execute the actions proposed in 
their plans. 
There must also be an active link with the universities, in 
this way their interrelationship can be strengthened in favor of 
considering smart tourist destinations.  Therefore,  this new 
normality requires  reinventing  itself  for  the  adaptation  of 
companies and their workforce, as it is  in the Gig Economy, 
being the  human talent  that  chooses  where,  how much and 
when they want to work through mobile applications, allowing 
companies to adapt and not die, also activate a collaborative 
economy in local development. 
Part of this, they mentioned that the present capacities of the 
territory are  considered the elements of  knowledge, 
experiences, cultural, social and historical heritage, since they 
are the people who carry out the activities and it is they who 
shape the territories, taking  advantage  of and enhancing  the 
conditions endogenous  IT  that  is integrated into the 
community in co-construction processes. Also, its importance 
of applying accessible instruments  that  collect  cultural 
historical bases, geographical cond itions, natural heritage, 
ecological, socioeconomic, political and entrepreneurial 
ecosystems, these indicators being to generate opportunities 
for the creation of locally-based tourism products in territorial 
co-creation and ecosystems of entrepreneurs in the territory. 
4.3 Mexico 
Lastly, the group of experts from Mexico argued that IT is 
the understanding of the interrelationships that occur between 
the actors in a territory that seek their own development and 
that part of the premises of the knowledge of said actors should 
be inco rporated into the processes of formulation and 
management of development plans for the territorial space. In 
turn, ICTs are an important element for supporting work and 
intelligent territorial development itself, thus reaching the 
basic construction of the IT concept, which are people or local 
actors, basic pillars to sustain themselves on intelligence 
manifold of the human being. 
In addition to the interrelationships and interactions 
between the people who cohabit in the territory, they affect 
cultural diversity and worldviews towards development that 
are integrated by their identity and their relationship with 
nature in their loca l communities. In this sense, from its 
construct of IT, from the phenomenon of tourism, it is 
embedded in its spaces and the resources that allow it to 
develop from human interaction between foreigners and hosts, 
enabling the tourist experience from the sp heres of life of the 
human being that impacts on the economic, social, cultural, 
environmental and political aspects, mainly. 
Such impacts allow their intelligent territorial development 
to nurture the local sphere of the communities and, where ICTs 
serve as essential tools to streamline the processes of detecting 
the needs of the local population and at the same time generate 
the necessary information to project proposals of local 
development, starting from the bottom up so that they are the 
tenants who provide the precise information about what they 
want and what is required for the benefit of the local 
community. 
In addition, the perception of the responsibility and 
seriousness of each individual in promoting intelligent 
development enters, in turn, the support of the scientific optics 
that are the academic institutions for the theoretical and 
methodological suppor t for the analysis of social reality. 
Therefore, people from the local sphere must rethink that 
tourism positively impacts their quality of life and that the 
territory is not only a container of complexities, but also a 
series of living relationships betwe en the impacts to society 
and nature, that is the development of IT. 
At this time, where the valuation of different spaces by 
tourism tends to reproduce attractions, often disconnected 
from their history and identities, from their environmental 
characteristics and disjointed from other economic activities, 
it is proposed th at IT provides a theoretical -methodological 
basis robust and proven. IT can be applied to any tourist 
destination, regardless of the degree of maturity, the tourist 
segment, etc., helping to improve the planning and 
management processes of tourism and the destination. In this 
way, there would be a more holistic and consensual vision that 
would have a positive impact on all the actors involved [1]. 
Therefore, its importance in the knowledge dedicated to the 
study of innovation and its thinking to satisfy the needs of the 
people who benefit their territory from the local, determining 
the various social strata and the differentiations that may exist. 
1452
 
Therefore, their relationship generates a series of activities 
related to the economic, social, cultural and environmental 
aspects, where from a generation of enterprises they can be 
strengthened in their sector, as long as it is planned correctly 
and does not affect irregularities or is only exclusive to a few. 
The construction of its concept alludes to other countries in 
the world reflecting on the various problems within their 
territories and, such effects of IT are a priority and that digital 
platforms are decisive in exercising a base support or, where 
appropriate, the causes for the opinions of consumers and 
make possible the opinions of the tourist influx, thus taking 
advantage of the spaces measuredly under the concept of IT 
and rethinking the load capacity, diversity of its tourist 
products and its local regulations of the communities. 
The themes identified from the theory are in two aspects, 
the European school has three programmatic axes, theoretical 
references; design of methods and the development of 
technological tools, in this sense, the findings of this research 
differ with these axes, since the results reflect that, for the three 
countries studied, what is important is community knowledge, 
sustainable development, tourism aspects and strategies, 
people and territory, which coincides with the Latin American 
school whose axes are: sustainable development of territories, 
people and identities. 
 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
The dynamic situation of the territory is based on the 
acquisition of knowledge based on the natural and cultural 
resources that the territory has, in the particular case of the 
Colombian experts; their results showed that IT has to do with 
the management of the space. The transformations of the 
social conditions of the community and its habitat, in this 
sense, put tourism, the community and development as the 
main aspects of tourism territorial intelligence (Figure 2). 
Regarding the group of experts from Costa Rica, they state 
that IT must be linked to the interaction between the different 
entities of the State and society, who make known their 
strategic plans and the actions to be followed in compliance 
with the different actions. In terms of tourism, in this sense, 
they put the differences, aspects and strategies as the main 
variables of tourism territorial intelligence (Figure 3). 
The group of experts from Mexico argued that TI is the 
understanding the interrelationships that occur between the 
actors of a territory that seek their own development and that 
part of the premises of the knowledge of said actors must be 
incorporated into  the processes of formulation and 
management of development plans for the territorial space, in 
this sense, put the territory, tourism and development as the 
main aspects of tourism territorial intelligence (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Cloud of words for the construct of the concept of 
tourism territorial intelligence in Colombia 
Source: Own elaboration 
 
 
Figure 3. Cloud of words for the construct of the concept of 
tourism territorial intelligence in Costa Rica 
Source: Own elaboration 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Cloud of words for the construct of the concept of 
tourism territorial intelligence in Mexico 
Source: Own elaboration 
 
The construct of the concept of tourism IT in the three 
participating countries (Mexico, Colombia and Costa Rica) of 
the present study are located around the territory, the 
community, development and tourism; where these categories 
are directly related to the three countries. Something important 
is that the actors do not see ICT as one of the main aspects for 
tourism IT. 
This work is the first approach to the construction of a 
concept of territorial tourism intelligence from the point of 
view of three Latin American countries. Most of the concepts 
focus on smart destinations and smart cities but not a 
composite concept of territorial intelligence and its relation to 
tourism. Therefore, it is proposed that the territorial tourism 
intelligence is the community knowledge applied to 
sustainable development focusing on aspects and tourism 
strategies framed in the territory having as a fundamental 
entity the people and the use of ICT. 
According to the above, it can be clearly assumed that the 
present work contributes to the theoretical conception of the 
object of study or research construct related to IT and tourism 
as important elements for the development of a territory 
according to t he results of the Latin American experts who 
participated in the study 
Qualitative research avoids quantification; narrative records 
are made of the phenomena that are studied through techniques 
such as participant observation and structured interviews. 
Qualitative methodology, aims at describing the qualities of a 
phenomenon. It seeks a concept that can encompass a part of 
reality. It is not a matter of proving or measuring to what 
degree a certain quality is found in a certain given event, but 
of discovering as many qualities as possible. 
In qualitative research, one should speak of in -depth 
understanding rather than accuracy: it is a matter of obtaining 
as deep an understanding as possible. 
One of the limitations of this study is the limited 
information provided by the experts involved, which makes it 
possible for future studies to approach the research from a 
quantitative or mixed approach in order to generalize better 
results. 
1453
 
This level of reflection and transparency in the discussion 
of methodological limitations not only increases the credibility 
and robustness of the current study, but also establishes a solid 
foundation for future research in the field of IT, generated by 
the development of more refined techniques to minimize 
subjectivity and bias in the interpretation of the data. 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] Perea-Medina, M.J., Navarro -Jurado, E., Luque -Gil, 
A.M. (2018). Inteligencia territorial: Conceptualizació n 
y avance en el estado de la cuestió n. Ví nculos posibles 
con los destinos turí sticos. Cuadernos de Turismo, (41): 
535-554. https://doi.org/10.6018/turismo.41.327141 
[2] Ortoll, E. (2012). Intelligè ncia territorial: iniciatives i 
models. COMeIN Revista de los Estudios de Ciencias de 
la Informació n y de la Comunicació n, 9 : 1217. 
https://doi.org/10.7238/c.n9.1217 
[3] Muñ oz-Cañ avate, A., Herrera -Barragá n, M. (2019). 
Inteligencia competitiva y territorial en Españ a: Una 
aproximació n al modelo de las Agencias de Desarrollo 
Regional. Anales de Documentació n, 22(1). 
http://doi.org/10.6018/analesdoc.22.1.336081 
[4] Gonzá lez, S., (2014). Inteligencia territorial y la 
observació n colectiva. Espacialidades. Revista de temas 
contemporá neos sobre lugares, polí tica y Cultura, 4(2): 
91-109.  
[5] Fagerberg, J., Srholec, M. (2013). Knowledge, 
capabilities, and the poverty trap: The complex interplay 
between technological, social, and geographical factor s. 
In Knowledge and the Economy. Springer, Dordrecht. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-6131-5_7 
[6] Bozzano, H. (2011). Territorio e Inteligencia Territorial: 
Geografí as, Saberes, Ciencia y Transformació n. UNLP-
CONICET, La Plata. 
[7] Hiernaux, D. (2002) ¿ Có mo definir el turismo? Un 
repaso disciplinario. Aportes y Transferencias , 6(2): 11-
27.  
[8] Parrilla-Gonzá lez, J.A., Pulido-Ferná ndez, J.I. (2017). 
Inteligencia Territorial y Turismo Hacia la integració n de 
un modelo de transformació n econó mica. Estudios y 
Perspectivas en Turismo, 26 (1): 1-21. 
https://hdl.handle.net/10953/1720 
[9] Miedes, B. , Ferná ndez I.M. (2011). Inteligencia 
territorial para la lucha contra la pobreza. Aprendizajes 
de 20 añ os sobre el terreno. Revista Iberoamericana de 
Relaciones Laborales, 23 : 41-73. 
https://doi.org/10.33776/trabajo.v23i0.957 
[10] Mérigot, B. (2014). Qu’est -ce que l’intelligence 
territoriale? (Jean -Jacques Girardot), Savigny -Avenir, 
Territoires et Dé mocratie Numé rique Locale. 
https://www.savigny-avenir.fr/2014/01/06/quest-ce-que-
lintelligence-territoriale-jean-jacques-girardot/. 
[11] Girardot, J. (2002). L›intelligence Territoriale, Mélanges 
Jean-Claude WIEBER. Annales Litté raires de Franche-
Comté , Besaç on. 
[12] Bertacchini, Y., Laroussi, O. (2003). Entre information 
& Processus de communication: L'intelligence 
territoriale. International Journal of Info & Com Sciences 
for Decision Making, 9: 1-16.  
[13] Devillet, G., Breuer, C. (2014). Contribution à  
l'intelligence territoriale appliqué e: Catalogue raisonné  
de l'information territoriale disponible sur internet et 
sources en Europe . In International Conference of 
Territorial Intelligence, Besanç on 2008, Besanç on, 
France. https://shs.hal.science/halshs-00516276 
[14] Girardot, J. (2009). Evolution of the concept of territorial 
intelligence within the coordination action of the 
European network of territorial intelligence. Res-Ricerca 
e Sviluppo per le Politiche Sociali, 1-2: 11-29.  
[15] Bozzano, H. (2010). Transformació n entre actores 
polí ticos y actores territoriales con sustento cientí fico. V 
Congreso Internacional Crisis de la globalizació n 
econó mica y el crecimiento insustentable en Amé rica 
Latina, octubre de 2010, Guayana, Venezuela. UNEG. 
[16] Almasa, B. (2010). Inteligencia Territorial para una 
Redefinició n Eficiente de las Polí ticas Pú blicas. 
TRABAJO. Revista Iberoamericana de Relaciones 
Laborales, 23: 75-94. 
https://doi.org/10.33776/trabajo.v23i0.959 
[17] Karol, J., Cirio, G., Frediani, J., Paolasso, P., Carut, C., 
Furlan, A., Tortora, T. (2012). Inteligencia territorial y 
transformació n II: El lugar del Estado. Aplicació n a 
cinco casos. 4°  Simposio Internacional de Investigació n 
"La Investigació n en la Universidad", San Salvador de 
Jujuy, Argentina, pp. 475 -494. 
https://shs.hal.science/halshs-00796452 
[18] Sá nchez, N., Betancourt, M., Falcó n, M. (2012). 
Acercamiento teó rico al desarrollo local sostenible y su 
repercusió n para el turismo. El Periplo Sustentable, 22 : 
7-36.  
[19] Gliemmo, F. (2014). Inteligencia territorial y turismo: 
Un diá logo hacia la definició n de lugares. Necesidades y 
expectativas. Estudios de casos en Argentina y Uruguay. 
11th Annual International Conference of Territorial 
intelligence of INTI, "Territorial intelligence and 
globalization tensions, transition and transformation", La 
Plata, Argentina, pp. 1-12. https://shs.hal.science/halshs-
00941343. 
[20] Soulier, E., Neffati, H., Legrand, J., Rousseau, F., 
Bugeaud, F., Calvez, P. , Saurel, P. (2013). Territorial 
assemblages simulation for territorial intelligence. In 
10th International Conference of Territorial Intelligence, 
Liè ge, Belgium, p. 9. https://shs.hal.science/halshs -
00777450. 
[21] Bock, I.A., Costa, R., Rodrigues, C., Macke, J. (2021). 
Examining the concept of governance in tourism 
research. Tourism and Hospitality Management, 27(3) : 
629-668. https://doi.org/10.20867/thm.27.3.9 
[22] Ivars-Baidal, J., Solsona-Monzoní s, F J., Giner-Sá nchez, 
D. (2016). Gestió n turí stica y tecnologí as de la 
informació n y la comunicació n (TIC): El nuevo enfoque 
de los destinos inteligentes. Documents d’Anàlisi 
Geogrà fica, 62(2): 327-346. 
http://doi.org/10.5565/rev/dag.285 
[23] Masselot, C. (2017). Territorial intelligence 
communicational and community system (TICCS). Res-
Ricerca e Sviluppo per le politiche sociali, (1 -2 Numero 
speciale 2008), 90 -104. https://shs.hal.science/halshs -
01521592. 
[24] Girardot, J. (2010). Principes, mé thodes et outils 
d'intelligence territoriale. é valuation participative et 
observation coopé ra tive. In Sé minaire Europé en 
"Conhecer Melhor Para Agir Melhor" Evora 2000, Evora, 
Portugal, pp. 7-17. https://shs.hal.science/halshs -
00539811. 
[25] Canaveri, T.,  Masselot, C. (2018). Aplicació n de 
1454
 
mé todos territorii y catalyse en el diagnó stico de 
problemá ticas sociales y ambientales en dos zonas del 
gran la plata ; Universidad Cató lica de Pereira. Facultad 
de Arquitectura y Diseñ o; Arquetipo , 16: 79 -96. 
http://hdl.handle.net/11336/87866 
[26] Villareal-Gó mez, A. (2017). Inteligencia territorial como 
proceso para el aná lisis territorial y el desarrollo local de 
Isla Grande en el Archipié lago de Islas del Rosario 
(Distrito de Cartagena de Indias, Colombia). Tesis 
Doctoral. Universidad de Huelva, Españ a, Departamento 
de Historia, Geografí a y Antropologí a. 
http://hdl.handle.net/10272/14512. 
[27] Espinoza, R, Bravo, J.L., Verduzco, M.C., Má rquez, A.R. 
(2023). Inteligencia territorial, innovació n y 
emprendimientos sociales turí sticos. Disrupciones para 
el desarrollo regional sustentable y la calidad de vida. 
Universidad de Guadalajara. 
http://www.cuc.udg.mx/es/inteligencia-territorial-
innovacion-y-emprendimientos-sociales-turisticos-
disrupciones-para-el. 
[28] Garcí a-Madurga, M.Á., Grilló-Mé ndez, A.J., Esteban-
Navarro, M.Á. (2020). Territorial intelligence, a 
collective challenge for sustainable development: A 
scoping review. Social Sciences, 9(7) : 126. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci9070126 
[29] Luque, A., Zayas, B., Caro, J. (2015). Los Destinos 
Turí sticos inteligentes en el marco de la inteligencia 
territorial: Conflictos y oportunidades. Investigaciones 
turíSticas, 10: 1-25. 
https://doi.org/10.14198/INTURI2015.10.01 
[30] Berg, B.L. (2001). Qualitative research methods for the 
social sciences. Allyn and Bacon, Pearson Education 
Company, Needham Heights. 
[31] Bogdan, R., Taylor, S.J. (1975). Introduction to 
Qualitative Research Methods : A Phenomenological 
Approach to the Social Sciences. Wiley: New York 
[32] Pulido, M., Pulido, J. (2016). Existe un buen modelo para 
implementar la gobernanza en destinos turí sticos? La 
opinió n de los expertos en sostenibilidad en los modelos 
actuales de gestió n turí stica. In Sostenibilidad en los 
Modelos Actuales de Gestió n turíStica. Actas del XIX 
Congreso Internacional de Turismo, Universidad, 
Empresa. Tirant lo Blanch, Valencia, En Prensa, pp. 57-
85. 
[33] Sancho, A. (2001). Apuntes de metodologí a de la 
investigació n en turismo. Organizació n Mundial del 
Turismo, Madrid. https://www.e -
unwto.org/doi/pdf/10.18111/9789284404889. 
[34] Kvale, S. (2011). Las Entrevistas en Investigació n 
Cualitativa. Ediciones Morata, S. L. 
[35] ATLAS.ti 22. (2022). ATLAS.ti qualitative data analysis. 
https://atlasti.com/es/. 
[36] Villanueva-Sá nchez, R., Velá zquez -Torres, J.C., 
Rosales-Cervantes, G. (2021). ATLAS.ti: herramienta 
para medir la participació n de actores estraté gicos 
locales en la gestió n del turismo rural para Tomatlá n, 
Jalisco. Rosa dos Ventos-Turismo e Hospitalidade, 13(3): 
681-700. https://doi.org/10.18226/21789061.v13i3p681 
[37] Mativi, C., Niveiros, S. , Carneiro-Junior, J. (2020). 
Software de aná lisis cualitativo de datos (QDA): Aná lisis 
de artí culos publicados en las bases de datos SPELL y 
SCIELO. Revista Estudos e Pesquisas em Administraç ã o, 
4(2): 156173. https://doi.org/10.30781/repad.v4i2.10318 
[38] Flick, U. (2007). Introducció n a la Investigació n 
Cualitativa. Ediciones Morata, S. L. 
[39] Woods, M., Paulus,  T., Atkins, D. , Macklin, R. (2015) 
Advancing qualitative research using qualitative data 
analysis software (QDAS)? Reviewing potential versus 
practice in published studies using ATLAS.ti and NVivo, 
1994-2013. Social Science Computer Review , 34(5) : 
597-617. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439315596311 
[40] Vila-Henninger, L.A. (2019) . Turning talk into 
“Rationales”: Using the extended case method for the 
coding and analysis of semi -structured interview data in 
ATLAS.ti. Bulletin de Methodologie Sociologique, 143: 
28-52. https://doi.org/10.1177/0759106319852887 
[41] Scales, J. (2013) Qualitative analysis of student 
assignments: A practical look at ATLAS.ti . Reference 
Services Review, 41 (1): 134-147. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/00907321311300956 
[42] Paulus, T.M., Bennett, A.M. (2017). ‘I have a love -hate 
relationship with ATLAS.ti’ ™: Integrating qualitative 
data analysis software into a graduate research methods 
course. International Journal of Research & Method in 
Education, 40(1): 19-35. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1743727X.2015.1056137 
[43] Lopezosa, C., Codina, L., Pere F. (2022). ATLAS.ti para 
entrevistas semiestructuradas: Guí a de uso para un 
aná lisis cualitativo eficaz. Barcelona: DigiDoc Research 
Group (Pompeu Fabra University), DigiDoc Reports, 
2022 RTI11/2022. http://hdl.handle.net/10230/52848. 
[44] Gibbs, G. (2012). El aná Lisis de Datos Cualitativos en 
Investigació n Cualitativa. Ediciones Morata, S. L. 
 
1455